Inflation Developments 
1. In January, consumer prices increased by 1.98 percent, and annual inflation reached 7.75 percent. Food prices, tax adjustments and exchange rate movements were influential in this rise and core inflation indicators recorded an increase due to core goods. Meanwhile, services inflation maintained its relatively mild course. 
 
2. Annual food group inflation climbed to 10.89 percent. In January, not only fresh fruits and vegetables but also other products registered price hikes. This resulted in increased annual unprocessed food inflation despite the high base from the previous year. Meanwhile, upon price increases that spread across the group, processed food prices were up by 1.42 percent and the group’s annual inflation reached 8 percent. 
 
3. In January, despite the fall in international oil prices, energy prices increased owing to the rise in domestic fuel prices amid the depreciation of the Turkish lira. Meanwhile, in the alcoholic beverages and tobacco products group, SCT adjustments introduced pushed the tobacco products’ prices up by 7.4 percent.
 
4. Prices of services edged up by 0.93 percent, and the group’s annual inflation maintained its level around 8 percent. Seasonally adjusted data pointed to a limited rise in the underlying trend of services inflation in this period. Meanwhile, annual core goods inflation increased by about 1 percentage points to 7.12 percent. This was mainly driven by the surging prices of durable goods on the reverberations of the depreciation in the Turkish lira besides the raised SCT on automobiles. On the other hand, annual inflation in the clothing group remained on a downward trend. Core goods prices accelerated as the depreciation in the Turkish lira that started in mid-December has reflected on prices since January.
5. In sum, The Monetary Policy Committee (the Committee) closely monitors the recent deterioration in the inflation outlook and expectations. Inflation is likely to hover above the 5-percent target for some time due to the recent tax adjustments, exchange rate developments and the unfavorable course of food prices. 
 
Factors Affecting Inflation 
6. Recent data suggest that final domestic demand continued to increase moderately in the fourth quarter. Following the recent sharp fluctuations, the industrial production index remained steady at its November level in December. Yet, in quarterly terms, industrial production posted a modest 
quarter-on-quarter increase in the fourth quarter, which is close to the average growth rate seen since early 2012. 
7. The moderate trend in private consumption demand continued in the last quarter of the year. Production and imports of consumer goods were up 
quarter-on-quarter compared to the previous quarter. Despite hovering slightly below the averages of the previous quarter, sales of automobiles and white goods remained elevated throughout the fourth quarter. Meanwhile, investment demand was more favorable in the fourth quarter. Production of capital goods grew moderately quarter-on-quarter in the final quarter. The production of capital goods excluding vehicles, an indicator for the underlying trend, recorded a larger growth than total capital goods. Similarly, imports of capital goods increased as well. 
8. Data suggest that exports maintained their modest growth trend in the fourth quarter. In fact, the non-gold 