Summary of Discussions on the Current Economic Situation2)After briefings by staff on ‘Current Economic Developments in Korea’,‘FX and International Finance’ and ‘Financial Market Trends’, thediscussions of the Monetary Policy Board (MPB) members covered thefollowing areas:With regard to the global economy, members’ assessment was that theUS economy had maintained steady growth, led by consumption, and theeconomy in the euro area had showed signs of improvement, centeringaround domestic demand, while the slowdown in economic growth and thesluggishness of economic activities in China had continued. As tointernational financial markets, most members evaluated stock prices ashaving risen substantially, Treasury bond yields in major countries ashaving mostly fallen, and the US dollar as having depreciated considerably,generally due to the run-up in international oil prices, additional easingmeasures by major countries, and expectations of a slower pace of USpolicy rate hikes.Concerning the domestic economy, some members assessed that thetrend of decline in exports had continued, but domestic demand activitiessuch as consumption, and the sentiments of economic agents appeared tobe improving somewhat.With regard to the domestic financial markets, meanwhile, mostmembers noted that, with international financial market volatility havingreduced, foreigners’ portfolio investment funds had shifted to an inflow,stock prices had risen considerably, and the won-dollar rate had fallensignificantly.As to prices, members observed that consumer price inflation had stoodat 1.0 percent, a decrease from the previous month, due mainly to fasterdeclines in petroleum product prices and slower increases in service charges,and that core inflation had also decreased slightly month-on-month to 1.7%.

Discussions Concerning Monetary Policy Decision (Summary)The main details of the MPB Members’ discussions concerning achange in the Bank of Korea Base Rate were as follows:Members shared the opinion that, in overall consideration of thechanges in the domestic and international economic environments, it wouldbe desirable this month to hold the Base Rate at its current level for theintermeeting period.Among them, one member noted that, looking overall at changes infinancial and economic conditions at home and abroad for the past monthand the adjusted economic outlook in April, the inflation path had beenpartially revised downward, influenced by an additional decline ininternational oil prices, while the growth path had also been revisedslightly downward, affected by the continued downward trend of exportsand lackluster domestic demand. The member diagnosed that the downwardrevision of the growth path was mainly because the growth trend in thefirst quarter had been lower than original projection, due to mountinguncertainties about external conditions, including the financial andeconomic instability in China. The member went on to comment that,given that economic sentiment had improved of late and domestic demandwas also showing partial signs of recovery, the domestic economy wasexpected to show a recovering trend, albeit modest, and the Base Rate’scurrent level still seemed accommodative, even in light of changes ineconomic and price conditions. The member then put forward the viewthat it would be desirable to keep the Base Rate at its current level of1.5% for the intermeeting period. The member, however, also pointed outthat the remaining downside risks included a policy rate hike by the USFed, changes in the growth structure in China, and the possibility ofBrexit, and expressed the view that attention should be paid to thepossibility of increased capital flows and exchange rate volatility stemming

from a sudden reversal of global preferences for risky assets.
Another member set forth a number of points for the Board to
consider in its operation of appropriate monetary policy. First, the slope of
the future growth path was forecast to remain unchanged from its initial
level. This was because, although a slight downward shift in the growth
path in line with the export shock from sluggish external demand was
estimated to have brought about the widening of the negative GDP gap,
domestic demand was expected to show a modest recovery due to
improved economic sentiment, along with the gradual easing of export
sluggishness. Second, although disinflationary pressures were projected to
weaken gradually with underlying upward trends of consumer price
inflation and core inflation continuing and inflation expectations remaining
stable, demand-side cyclical inflationary pressures still seemed insufficient
to reach an appropriate inflation level. Third, slack in the production
sector had not improved significantly, and although labor market slack had
improved slightly, it was concentrated in relatively vulnerable sectors. The
member then expressed the view that, although an overall consideration of
these points could lead to the conclusion that there is a need for further
Base Rate adjustments, it would be desirable to hold the Base Rate at its
current level for the intermeeting period, while checking to see if the
growth and inflation paths for the second quarter were consistent with the
initial projections, and to strengthen the examination of changes in credit,
exchange rate and other policy transmission channels and factors causing
financial instability at home and abroad, thus maintaining a flexible policy
stance. The member went on to note that, concerning future policy
operation, the Board should effectively deal with increased volatility of
capital flows and the exchange rate and cautiously monitor whether there
was any change in the private-sector credit cycle. The member expressed
the opinion that monetary policy should focus on the timely easing of
downside aggregate demand and inflation pressures accompanying structural

expectations of low growth and the hysteresis effect, and on maintaining
stability in the financial system despite internal and external shock factors.
One other member presented the view that, in overall consideration of
recent economic conditions at home and abroad, it would be desirable to
keep the Base Rate at its current level during the intermeeting period.
Meanwhile, the member mentioned that, concerning the Korean economy
during the last few years, with the persistent trends of slow growth and
low inflation, there were growing calls for the central bank to play a more
active role, and that the so-called Korean-style quantitative easing was
arousing a great deal of interest and controversy, regardless of whether this
policy is reasonable or not. With regard to this, the member argued that
the Bank of Korea should develop various policy measures tailored to
Korean economic conditions as long as these measures do not conflict with
the central bank’s own functions. The member went on to state that
technical innovations in the areas of IT and payments and settlements were
expected to have decisive impacts on the central bank’s roles and its
implementation of monetary policy, and thus particular attention should be
paid to these innovations, and the necessary support and investment should
be expanded greatly.
Meanwhile, one member expressed the opinion that, in determining this
month’s Base Rate, a number of factors should be considered in addition
to domestic and overseas financial and economic conditions. First, although
the forecasts for the growth rate and consumer price inflation for this year
had been adjusted slightly downward in the recent economic outlooks, the
Korean economy was expected to show a mild recovery and inflation was
likely to accelerate gradually from the second quarter, and the Board
should therefore continue to monitor changes in upside and downside risks
to growth before deciding whether they should take a more accommodative
macroeconomic policy stance to support economic recovery. Secondly,
although the domestic and overseas financial markets stabilized recently,
reforms, on preventing the erosion of growth potential stemming from

attention must be paid to the US Fed’s further rate hikes, the slowdown in
Chinese economic growth, commodity price instability, increasing credit
risks of European banks, the possibility of Brexit, and risks related to
household loans. Finally, if Korea’s overall financial conditions are
examined in terms of various indicators such as real interest rates, the
liquidity growth rate and the MCI, it should be taken into account that
Korea’s financial conditions remain accommodative even compared with
those of major countries. In this regard, the member put forward the view
that, while holding the Base Rate at its current level of 1.5 percent for the
intermeeting period, it would be appropriate to closely monitor changes in
domestic and overseas economic trends and the development of risk factors
in the financial sector. Meanwhile, the member noted that, although Korea’s
fiscal soundness is much more favorable than that of major countries, fiscal
expenditure is likely to make far less contribution than before to growth,
due mainly to the plan to lower the rate of growth in fiscal expenditure in
this year’s budget and to the frontloading of budget spending during the
first quarter of 2016. In this regard, the member went on to state that, if
the situation calls for an additional easing of macroeconomic policy, such
as if the growth rate falls far below its forecast path, fiscal policy should
be given a more active role, with equal or higher priority than that placed
on monetary policy.
Another member stated the opinion that it would be advisable to cut the
Base Rate this month by 25 basis points from the current 1.5 percent to
1.25 percent. The member mentioned that a Base Rate cut would contribute
to enhancing economic sentiment, improving the sluggishness of exports
and domestic demand, and preventing the trend of low inflation from
becoming firmly entrenched, and would also help ease the relatively high
domestic interest rates due to additional financial easing policies in other
countries and the relative strengthening of the Korean won. The member
also argued that the US Fed is very likely to raise its policy rate in the
second half of this year, which would highly likely lead to further

divergence of major countries’ monetary policy stances and to even greater
uncertainties and volatility in the financial and FX markets. In light of this,
considering that policy transmission takes some time, active measures
should be taken so that the Korean economy could restore its inherent
resilience and break away from the trend of slow growth and low inflation.
The member also assessed the current economic situation as calling for an
appropriate expansion of fiscal spending, in addition to more
accommodative monetary policy, in order to improve the weakening
aggregate demand and infrastructure for growth. The member went on to
argue that, along with the implementation of such counter-cyclical measures,
the government should make strenuous efforts to carry out structural
reforms in major areas of the Korean economy, in order to more
fundamentally improve the Korean economy’s inherent resilience and
fundamentals and create new engines for growth.
One other member’s diagnosis of domestic and overseas financial and
economic conditions since last month’s monetary policy decision was that,
with regard to the financial sector, international financial market instability
had eased somewhat on the impact of major countries’ easing policies, and
volatility in the domestic financial markets had also decreased, but attention
needed to be paid to potential risk factors, such as household and corporate
debt. The member also judged that, in terms of the business cycle, global
economic growth was likely to slow down and there was only weak
momentum in the Korean economy moving toward a shift in economic
trends, due largely to sluggish exports and uncertainties regarding whether
improvements in domestic demand would continue. The member went on to
state that, with the Base Rate kept at its current level of 1.5 percent
during the intermeeting period, attention should be paid to the trends of
major countries’ economic conditions and their monetary and financial
policy trends, and also to trends of household and corporate debt and of
corporate restructuring, and momentum should also be created to increase
economy activity and maintain stable macroeconomic trends. In the short
term, the member also called for in-depth examinations of the possibilitythat the recent inversion of the yield curve might have implications forfuture economic activities or inflation, while at the same time payingattention to uncertainties regarding US monetary policy and to thepossibility of negative responses to the downward adjustment of economicoutlooks. The member also pointed out that financial innovation could beof help to monetary policy by enhancing the efficiency of the financialsystem, but it could also complicate the environment for policyimplementation. The member then emphasized that it would be important toexamine if monetary policy transmission channels were changing in Koreadue for example to the expansion of the market-based financial system, soas to strengthen the effectiveness of monetary policy, and added that itwould be also important to ensure resilience of economic and financialstructures, to limit any damages from negative shocks at home and abroad.The member also noted that, as the effects of the central bank’s monetarypolicy ultimately depended on the behavior of commercial banks that are atthe center of monetary policy transmissions, it would be also important toassess the capacity of Korean commercial banks to create credit and seekmeasures to enhance such capacity. From a long-term perspective,meanwhile, the member presented the view that it would be necessary todevelop effective indicators covering the employment situation and carry outvarious research, for example on the impacts of monetary policy onemployment and wages, so that the central bank could help resolveemployment problems with its monetary policy.Ⅳ. Results of Deliberation on Monetary Policy DirectionsIncorporating the outcome of their earlier discussions, memberscompiled a statement reflecting the views of the majority.Mr. Seong Keun Ha, however, dissented, expressing his clear oppositionto keeping the Base Rate at its current level, and arguing for lowering itby 0.25 of a percentage point.
Monetary Policy Decision□ The trend of economic recovery in the US has been sustained andthat indications of improvement, although weak, have appeared inthe euro area. The economic slowdown in China has shown signsof easing a bit, but economic growth in other emerging marketeconomies has continued to slow, centering aroundcommodity-exporting countries. The Board forecasts that the globaleconomy will maintain its recovery going forward, albeit at amoderate pace, centering around advanced economies such as theUS, but judges that it will be affected by factors such as financialand economic conditions in emerging market countries, internationaloil price movements, and global financial market volatility.□ Looking at the Korean economy, the trend of decline in exportshas continued but domestic demand activities such as consumption,and the sentiments of economic agents appear to be improvingsomewhat. On the employment front, the unemployment rate wassomewhat higher in March compared to that in March of last year,owing mainly to an expansion in job search activities. Theemployment-to-population ratio was also increased, however, as thenumber of persons employed has steadily grown. The Boardforecasts that the domestic economy will show a trend of modestimprovement going forward, centering around domestic demandactivities, but in view of external economic conditions judges theuncertainties surrounding the growth path to be still high.□ Consumer price inflation fell from 1.3% the month before to 1.0%in March, owing chiefly to increases in the extents of decline inpetroleum product prices. Core inflation excluding agricultural andpetroleum product prices also decreased slightly to 1.7%, from 1.8%
in February. Looking ahead the Board forecasts that consumer price
inflation will fall considerably short of the 2% inflation target for
the time being, due mainly to the low oil prices. In the housing
market, sales prices maintained their level of the previous month
while the uptrend in leasehold deposit prices slowed.
□ In the domestic financial markets, stock prices have risen and the
Korean won has appreciated against the US dollar since March, as
foreigners’ securities investment funds have recorded net inflows on
the effects of further monetary policy easing by major countries.
After having appreciated against the Japanese yen, the won has
depreciated somewhat against it again in line with the yen’s
strengthening. Long-term market interest rates have fallen back after
having previously risen, in reflection mainly of interest rate
movements in major countries. Bank household lending has
sustained a trend of increase at a level exceeding that of recent
years, led by mortgage loans.
□ Looking ahead, while working to support the recovery of economic
growth the Board will conduct monetary policy so as to maintain
price stability over a medium-term horizon, and also pay attention
to financial stability. In this process it will closely monitor any
changes in monetary policies or in financial and economic
conditions in major countries, the movements of capital flows, and
the trend of increase in household debt.