Summary of Discussions on the Current Economic Situation2)After briefings by staff on ‘Recent Economic Developments’, ‘FX andInternational Finance’ and ‘Financial Market Trends’, the discussions of theMonetary Policy Board (MPB) members covered the following areas:With regard to the global economy, members’ assessment was that,boosted largely by the robust growth of the US economy and favorableglobal manufacturing production, AEs had shown faster growth and EMEshad been recovering from their sluggishness. Members also evaluated thatinternational financial markets had been stable overall since the US FederalReserve’s rate hike in March.Concerning the domestic economy, members’ evaluation was that, withthe global economic recovery, exports and facilities investment had beenbuoyant, construction investment had been more favorable than expected,and domestic demand-oriented companies’ economic sentiment had beenshowing signs of recovery.With regard to the domestic financial markets, meanwhile, membersmentioned that inflows of foreign portfolio investment had expanded, stockprices had risen and the won-dollar exchange rate had declined, but thesemovements had later reversed, affected chiefly by geopolitical risks.As to prices, members noted that consumer price inflation had exceededits target of 2 percent during the first quarter, influenced by strong growthin the prices of oil and agricultural, livestock and fisheries products.

Discussions Concerning Monetary Policy Decision (Summary)The main details of the MPB members’ discussions concerning achange in the Bank of Korea Base Rate were as follows:Members shared the opinion that, in overall consideration of thechanges in the domestic and international financial and economicenvironments, it would be desirable to hold the Base Rate at its currentlevel of 1.25 percent for the intermeeting period.One member pointed out a number of major considerations for theappropriate conduct of monetary policy. First, the member stated that thedomestic real economy had continued to improve, with growth led bystrong exports and facilities investment in line with the global economicrecovery. The domestic economy was estimated to have grown faster thanoriginally projected during the first quarter, as construction investment,previously forecast to undergo a correction, had shown more favorablemovements than expected, and consumer sentiment and the sentiment ofdomestic demand-oriented companies, including those in the services sector,had been showing signs of recovery. As a result, the growth trend for theyear was expected to move slightly upward from the path forecast inJanuary. Second, inflation had accelerated, due mainly to supply-sidefactors, to exceed its target. Core inflation, however, had flattened andremained below 2 percent, while demand-side inflationary pressures,examined through core PCEPI and core inflation excluding regulatedprices, had not fully strengthened yet. In light of this, despite thelikelihood of consumer price inflation exceeding its target in the shortterm, there was only a limited possibility of this upward trend of inflationspreading to overall prices, and upward pressures were expected to weakenagain toward the second half of the year, with the effects of supply-sidefactors diminishing gradually. Third, slack in the manufacturing sector wasseen to have been improving, albeit slightly, with production growth

continuing to outpace production capacity growth. The overall slack in thelabor force had slightly improved in the labor market in March, with theunemployment and participation gaps narrowing while the time gapwidened. Fourth, looking at financial stability conditions, market interestrates and the spread between long- and short-term yields had been stable,while foreign portfolio investment inflows had increased. With regard tohousehold credit, growth in bank lending had continued to slow andnon-bank lending, after having maintained higher growth than usual, hadbeen growing somewhat more slowly with the implementation of strongercredit management measures. In overall consideration of theabove-mentioned real economic and inflation trends and financial stabilityconditions, the member assessed that it was advisable to keep the BaseRate unchanged from the current level of 1.25 percent for the intermeetingperiod.Another member presented the view that it would be appropriate to holdthe Base Rate at its current level of 1.25 percent to maintain the currentmonetary policy stance. The member mentioned that the recent recovery ofglobal economic growth seemed to have been led by the accommodativefiscal policies of the US and some other major countries and also by thebooming IT sector, and went on to state that expectations of economicrecovery had been preemptively reflected in the financial markets, which hadboosted consumer and investor sentiment, leading to expansions in productionand exports. The member assessed that the Korean economy was highlydependent on the IT industry and thus was benefiting from the IT boom, andadded that facilities investment had maintained IT investment-led growth sincelast year and construction investment had remained more favorable thanoriginally forecast, and thanks to the derived effects of these trends, albeitslight, consumption seemed to have bottomed out somewhat. Taking theseinto overall consideration, the member forecast this year’s growth to exceedthe previous projection, and took the view that, as price outlooks were
unlikely to be changed much due to the GDP gap narrowing only slightlyand as downside risks remained, it would be desirable to keep the Base Rateat its current level of 1.25 percent during the intermeeting period andmaintain the current monetary policy stance. In addition, the member stressedthe need to consider the following three points in making monetary policydecisions. First, since the current trend of recovery in the Korean economycould not last long, it would be necessary to strengthen market-friendlymacroprudential policies to ease the buildup of financial imbalances andimprove financial stability. Second, considering that domestic and overseasinvestors were highly sensitive to the recently heightened geopolitical risks,there was a need to reexamine the stability of the financial system. Third,amid the recent positive external conditions, including the boom in the ITindustry, it would be desirable to ensure macroeconomic policy space andpromote medium-term growth, rather than adopting short-sighted approachessuch as expanding investment and boosting consumption.One other member expressed the opinion that it would be desirable tokeep the Base Rate unchanged from the current level for the intermeetingperiod. The member noted that, concerning the global economy, advancedeconomies were showing expanded recovery, and emerging marketeconomies were breaking out of their sluggishness. The member alsoassessed domestic economic activities to have shown improvement, as thesluggishness in private consumption had eased somewhat and exports andfacilities investment had increased. The member commented that consumerprice inflation had risen above the 2% inflation target, influenced byaccelerating upward trends of oil prices and agricultural, livestock andfisheries product prices. The member also judged the domestic financialmarkets to have remained stable overall. The member noted that, inreflection of such improvements in economic activities, the economicgrowth rates for this year and next year had each been revised upward by0.1 percentage point. The member emphasized that, while bearing in mind
concerns about greater downside risks, it was necessary to watch if theglobal economic recovery would continue as a trend. Meanwhile, themember expressed the opinion that, considering that consumer priceinflation was anticipated to be below the 2% inflation target in annualterms, and that the domestic economy had thus far been growing at amodest pace, it was necessary to maintain the current accommodativemonetary policy stance. Next, the member commented that, although thetrend of household debt growth had been slowing somewhat of late, theBank of Korea should continue to monitor the household debt trend, whilebeing aware of the relevant risks going forward, Concerning the possibilityof capital outflows, the member noted that Korea had not been greatlyaffected, with the trend of capital inflows continuing since the US Fed’sMarch policy rate hike. The member, however, stressed the need tocontinue working actively to maintain Korea’s international credit standing,which set it apart from other emerging market economies, sincegeopolitical risks had been heightened of late.Meanwhile, one member expressed the opinion that it would beappropriate to keep the Base Rate unchanged in April. The member notedthat, in the real sector, a recovery in exports and the consequent largeincrease in facilities investment had led an overall rise in economicgrowth, and a slowdown in construction investment had been delayed,contrary to expectations. The member, however, commented that, althoughconsumption had remained sluggish, the possibility seemed low thatconsumption would be worse than expected, as consumer sentimentindicators had been improving, due mainly to the easing of domesticpolitical uncertainties, robust exports, and the improved profitability ofdomestic companies and the consequent rises in their stock prices.Accordingly, the member saw that the real economic trend in the firstquarter was slightly above the January outlook released by the Bank ofKorea. The member, however, emphasized that forecasts of futureeconomic trends had become more uncertain due to geopolitical risks, such
as Korea's deployment of THAAD and the North Korea nuclear issue. Interms of prices, the member noted that overall consumer price inflationwas nearing its target of 2%, as a rebound in oil prices had led to arebound in prices of industrial products, and one-off shock factors, such asavian influenza, had caused prices of agricultural, livestock and fisheriesproducts to rise. The member, however, saw that the risk of the pricepath for this year significantly overshooting the existing path forecast wasunlikely to be high, given that consumption remained sluggish and thetrend of real economic growth in the first quarter was mainly attributableto strong exports and facilities investment. Finally, in terms of financialstability, the member commented that there had been two worrisomedevelopments related to household debt, which had shown signs ofstabilization this year. The member pointed out that, first, lending tohouseholds by non-bank financial institutions had been rising sharply, ledby mutual credit firms, and second, optimism that the housing marketwould stabilize could be premature, since slower construction investmenthad not materialized, contrary to expectations. The member expressed theopinion in particular that in many cases a sharp increase in the supply offinancial resources to a specific sector through an unorthodox financialsector was followed by insufficient credit risk management, and thuscaution should be exercised to prevent unreasonable expectations about therevitalization of the housing market in the future, and the business andrisk management statuses of mutual credit firms should be continuallymonitored for soundness. Meanwhile, the member noted that, althoughsome had raised concerns about instability in the foreign exchange andforeign capital markets due to an inversion of or narrowing gap betweenpolicy rates in Korea and the US, there had not been any sign ofinstability so far, and thus it was still possible to conduct monetary policyin reflection of the overall macroeconomic conditions in Korea. Themember stated that, taking all those points into overall consideration, itwould be appropriate to keep the Base Rate unchanged from the current
level in April, while, on the international front, keeping a close watch onthe THAAD issue and other geopolitical risks and the developmentsrelated to their impacts on the Korean economy, and on the domesticfront, monitoring the future household debt trend.Another member expressed the view that, while maintaining the BaseRate at its current level, attention should be paid to the extent that thegradually spreading global reflation trend would affect the Koreaneconomy. The member evaluated that the reflation trend in the worldeconomy was gradually spreading, as the international financial market andemerging market economies remained stable. The member also noted that,as Korea's exports rebounded with the recovery in world trade, productionin the relevant manufacturing sectors had increased and facilitiesinvestment was recovering at a faster-than-expected pace. The member,meanwhile, noted that, although some consumer sentiment indicators hadrebounded, a recovery could not easily be confirmed yet from theassociated real economic indicators, particularly in the service industry,which reflects domestic demand conditions. Accordingly, the memberpointed out that private consumption remained sluggish. The member,however, assessed that overall domestic demand, including investment, hadnot been slowing further, as facilities investment had expanded sharply anda correction in construction investment had not materialized yet. Themember commented that these export and domestic demand conditionsimplied that short-term downside risks to the Korean macroeconomy hadgenerally diminished. The member then expressed the opinion that if themacroeconomic trend seen in recent months continued, the current negativeGDP gap would narrow, thus lowering the possibility of an additionalslowing of underlying inflation, which was still running below its targetlevel. Therefore, the member presented the opinion that the Bank of Koreashould maintain its accommodative monetary policy stance to ensure thatunderlying inflation reaches the target level, as a recovery in foreign demand would lead to improved domestic demand. The member alsostated the view that it was necessary to seek a policy direction that wouldreduce the possibility of household debt and construction investmentescalating into medium-term destabilizing factors in the macroeconomy.One other member expressed the opinion that, while maintaining theBase Rate at its current 1.25% level for the intermeeting period, the Bankof Korea should keep a close watch on developments of domestic andoverseas risk factors and their impacts. The member saw that the recoveryin the world economy had been maintained, that the international financialmarkets remained stable overall after the US Fed's March rate hike, andthat the trend of domestic economic growth had expanded further, led byexports and facilities investment. Looking at domestic economic conditionsin more detail, the member first stated the opinion that the slight upwardrevisions to the Bank of Koreas’ economic growth forecasts for this yearand next year were appropriate in consideration of the recent acceleratinggrowth of exports and facilities investment and the improvement ofeconomic sentiment, despite several downside risks to the future growthpath. Second, the member commented that, looking at price conditions,with consumer price inflation rising above the inflation target in March,affected by increasing prices of petroleum products and prices ofagricultural, livestock, and fisheries products, it would likely fluctuatearound the 2% level for the time being, but the member expected theyear-on-year consumer price uptrend to slow somewhat from the fourthquarter on. Third, the member stated the need for further observation tojudge if household debt growth would fundamentally slow, as non-banks'household lending was showing higher-than-usual growth and housingprices were also showing a rebound, although slower growth in banks'household lending had continued from the end of last year. Fourth, themember saw that, although the financial markets had remained stableoverall, price variables and capital flow volatility could increase goingforward, and particularly since a significant portion of foreign bond investment that had flowed in recently was aimed at short-term profittaking, such investment could flow out rapidly if market conditions wereto change. The member also noted that the US Fed had implied apossible change in its reinvestment policy from the end of this year. Themember thus called for attention to the possibility that such an implicationcould cause international financial markets to become highly unstable, justas when a Fed chair's implication that US quantitative easing would betapered off caused the 2013 Taper Tantrum. The member stated that,looking at all these points comprehensively, there was no great need for achange to the existing policy stance of maintaining accommodativemonetary policy to support the recovery of economic growth, whilecontinuing to pay attention to risks to financial stability. The member thenset out the view that it would be best to keep the Base Rate at itscurrent 1.25% level during the intermeeting period, while closelyexamining developments of domestic and overseas risk factors and theirimpacts.

Results of Deliberation on Monetary Policy DirectionsIncorporating the outcome of their earlier discussions, a statement wascompiled with the unanimous consent of all the members.< Ref >Monetary Policy Decision□ The Monetary Policy Board of the Bank of Korea decided today toleave the Base Rate unchanged at 1.25% for the intermeeting period.□ Based on currently available information the Board considers that theglobal economic recovery has continued to expand. The global financialmarkets have shown generally stable movements, with the trend ofrising stock prices continuing for example. Looking ahead the Boardsees the global economic recovery as likely to be affected by factorssuch as the directions of the new US government's economic policies,the pace of monetary policy normalization by the US Federal Reserve,the movements toward spreading trade protectionism, and the politicaluncertainties in the euro area.□ The Board judges that the trend of domestic economic growth hasexpanded somewhat, as exports and investment have improved althoughconsumption has remained low. The sluggishness in employmentconditions has eased, with the extent of decline in the number ofpersons employed in the manufacturing sector having lessened and thetrend of increase in persons employed in the service sector expanded.The Board sees the domestic economy as likely to continue its trendof moderate growth going forward, and forecasts a rate of GDP growthfor this year slightly above the January projection (2.5%). Exports will
sustain their trend of improvement, thanks chiefly to the globaleconomic recovery, and domestic demand activities will also recovermoderately as the deterioration in economic agents’ sentiment eases.However, the paces of improvement in exports and domestic demandactivities are expected to be limited, owing to changes in conditionsrelated to trade with major countries and to the weak improvement inhouseholds’ real purchasing power.□ Consumer price inflation has continued at the 2% target level, in linemainly with increases in the prices of petroleum and agricultural,livestock and fisheries products. Core inflation (with food and energyproduct prices excluded from the CPI) has remained in the mid- toupper-1% range, while the rate of inflation expected by the generalpublic has fallen to the mid-2% level. Looking ahead the Boardexpects that consumer price inflation will for the time being fluctuateat the 2% level, and for the year as a whole slightly exceed theJanuary projection (1.8%). Core inflation will maintain a level in themid- to upper-1% range.□ In the domestic financial markets, the volatilities of both stock pricesand long-term market interest rates have shown low levels, inreflection for example of stable movements in the global financialmarkets. After having fallen the Korean won-US dollar exchange ratehas rebounded, due mainly to a shift to US dollar strengthening and togeopolitical risks. The extent of growth in bank household lending hascontinued to lessen, but the substantial increase in household lendingby non-banks has been sustained. Housing sales prices in Seoul and itssurrounding areas have risen slightly, and those in the rest of thecountry have held steady.□ Looking ahead, the Board will conduct monetary policy so as to ensurethat the recovery of economic growth continues and consumer price inflation can be stabilized at the target level over a medium-termhorizon, while paying attention to financial stability. As the inflationarypressures on the demand side are not expected to be high given themoderate pace of domestic economic growth, the Board will maintainits stance of monetary policy accommodation. In this process it willclosely monitor conditions related to trade with major countries,geopolitical risks, the progress of monetary policy normalization by theUS Federal Reserve, and the trend of increase in household debt.