Summary of Discussions on the Current Economic Situation2)After briefings by staff on 'Current Economic Developments in Korea','FX and International Finance' and the 'Financial Markets', the discussionsof the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) members covered the followingareas:Members’ assessment was that, despite the continued sluggishness ofthe euro area economy, the global economy was maintaining its modestrecovery on the strength of improvements in the U.S. and in emergingmarket economies. Many members mentioned that, notwithstanding theU.S. sequester and the heightened political uncertainties in some overlyindebted euro area countries, the international financial markets weresustaining a favorable trend owing mainly to the continued quantitativeeasing policies of major economies.Most members assessed the recovery of the domestic economy ashaving weakened slightly temporarily, with indicators related to domesticdemand showing sluggishness due mainly to exceptional factors such asbase effects, while exports were sustaining a modest trend of recovery.Concerning the outlook, many members anticipated that, while theKorean economy would show improvement due in large part to the globaleconomic recovery amid improving consumer and investor sentiment, thepace of this improvement would be slow.With regard to the domestic financial markets, members pointed outthat, with the combined effect of the inflows of foreigners’ portfolio funds,the movements of the yen exchange rate and geopolitical risks, stockprices and the KRW/USD exchange rate remained stable, fluctuating withincertain ranges.

Consumer price inflation maintained its low level at around the 1%range despite hikes in agricultural product prices, as public utility fees wereshowing a trend of stability. Many members forecast that inflation wouldremain low for the time being, due mainly to the easing of demand-sidepressures.With regard to real estate prices, one member noted that, while housingprices were continuing their downtrend, most notably in Seoul and itssurrounding areas, leasehold deposit prices were sustaining their high ratesof increase in both Seoul and its surrounding areas and in other regions.

Discussions Concerning Monetary Policy Decision (Summary)The main details of the MPC Members’ discussions concerning achange in the Bank of Korea Base Rate were as follows:Most members shared the opinion that, although the trend of growth indomestic economic activity remained weak while prices were stable, giventhat external conditions were gradually improving and that the domesticeconomy was moving in the direction of recovery, albeit a weak one, itwould be best to keep the Base Rate at its current level during theintermeeting period while closely monitoring changes in the financial andeconomic environments at home and abroad.One of these members put forward the view that, since the Koreaneconomy is expected to be strongly affected if there are disharmoniesamong major developed economies in their policy stances related toquantitative easing, leading to a widening of the interest rate gaps amongcountries, to heightened exchange rate volatility and to a sharp increase incapital flows, the economic movements and policy stances of majoreconomies should be closely monitored and active steps taken to draw upmeasures for responding as necessary.Another member emphasized that, while attention was called for toensure that exports could carry out their role despite changes in the termsof trade, and while close scrutiny of consumption was needed to assistwith the recovery of real economic activity, the monitoring of factorsdisrupting the financial system - such as the household debt situation andthe deterioration in financial conditions of those with poor credit ratings -and of abrupt surges in foreign currency flows, should be strengthened.One other member was of the opinion that great attention should bepaid to topics which had recently become social issues, such as
legalization of the shadow economy, alleviation of household debtproblems and the development of measures to increase the householdsavings rate, and that the central bank should study in depth the role thatit should play in this regard.Another member, however, expressed the opinion that it would beappropriate to cut the Base Rate by 25 basis points, considering theweakening of demand-side inflation pressures, the sustained sluggishness ofconsumption, the investment and export indicators in the domestic realsector that were unlikely to show clear improvements for a considerableperiod of time, and the spread of accommodative monetary policies inmajor advanced countries and some emerging markets.Ⅳ. Results of Deliberation of Monetary Policy DirectionsIncorporating the outcome of their earlier discussions, the memberscompiled a statement that reflected the views of the majority.However, Mr. Ha, Seong Keun expressed clear opposition to the ideaof holding the Base Rate at its current level, and argued for a 0.25percentage point cut.

Monetary Policy Decision□ The Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of Korea decidedtoday to leave the Base Rate unchanged at 2.75% for theintermeeting period.□ Based on currently available information, the Committee considersthe moderate economic recovery in the US to have been sustainedbut economic activities in the euro area to have been unable toshake off their sluggishness, while emerging market countries haveshown continuing economic growth. The Committee expects theglobal economy to sustain its modest recovery going forward, butjudges that the uncertainties related for instance to the fiscal crisisin the euro area and to fiscal consolidation in the US have notlifted and remain as downside risks to growth.□ In Korea, although exports have maintained their trend of recoveryand construction investment has increased slightly, the Committeeappraises the economy to have sustained a weak level of growth asconsumption and facilities investment have declined owing totemporary factors. On the employment front, the increase in thenumber of persons employed was smaller in February than in themonth before, as a result of the accelerated decline in the numberof temporary and daily workers due mainly to the Lunar New Yearholiday. Going forward, there is no change to the Committee’sforecast that the domestic economy will show a negative output gapfor a considerable time, due mostly to the slow recovery of theglobal economy in consequence chiefly of the sluggishness ofeconomic activities in the euro area.□ Consumer price inflation and core inflation excluding the prices of

agricultural and petroleum products continued to run at low levelssimilar to those in the previous month, at 1.4% and 1.3%respectively in February. Inflation appears likely to remain relativelylow, due to the weakening of demand-side pressures; the Committeeforecasts, however, that it will rise above its current level asdownward pressures from institutional factors partially disappear. Asfor housing prices, those in Seoul and its surrounding areascontinued on their downtrend and those in the rest of the countryon their moderate uptrend.□ In the financial markets, stock prices have shown slight fluctuations,as the influences of foreigners’ stock investment fund inflows andof the increase in Korea’s geopolitical risk have coincided, whilelong-term market interest rates have fallen due mainly to largeinflows of foreigners’ bond investment funds. The Korean won-USdollar exchange rate had fluctuated within a certain range, but hasrisen recently, owing largely to the emergence of geopolitical risk.□ Looking ahead, the Committee will closely monitor external riskfactors and Korea’s geopolitical risk and any consequent changes infinancial and economic conditions, continue its efforts to lowerinflation expectations, and conduct monetary policy so as to keepconsumer price inflation within the inflation target range over amedium-term horizon while ensuring that the growth potential isnot eroded due to the continuation of slow growth.