1. IPCA inflation, after recording 0% and 0.01% in June and July, respectively, remained close to zero in August (0.04%), and increased in September to 0.45%.  As a consequence, inflation accumulated in the first nine months of 2010 reached 3.60%, 0.39 p.p. above the one observed in the same period of 2009. Inflation increase in 2010 reflects, basically, the behavior of market prices, which increased by 4.19% in the year through September and contributed with 2.90% of the 3.60% recorded in the year. On its turn, regulated prices, which increased 2.03% in the year through July, decelerated and totaled 2.22% in the year through September, compared to 3.36% in the same period of 2009, contributing only 0.7% to cumulative inflation in the year through September. Regarding market prices, it bears emphasizing that while the prices of tradable goods reached 3.25% in the year through September (3.92% in twelve months), the prices of non-tradable goods reached 5.05% (6.31% in twelve months). The change in the prices of services, whose dynamics tends to show more persistence than that of the prices of goods, shows some stability, and reached 5.98% in the year through September and 6.90% in twelve months. The increase in the monthly IPCA index in September is greatly due to the elevation in the prices of food and beverages. In short, information available evidences deterioration of the inflationary dynamics at the margin, restricted to some groups, a movement that was anticipated by the Committee. 
 
2. The volatility of food prices performed a fundamental role in the behavior of 2010 headline inflation. In fact, due to accentuated swings in these prices, the IPCA dynamics showed two distinct moments: pronounced rise in the first four-month period, when food and beverages prices changed 5.19%; and relative stability in the following period, when they retreated 1.61%. It also bears emphasizing that twelve-month trailing household food price inflation increased from 0.88%, in December 2009, to 6.67%, in April 2010, and returned to 2.29%, in August; at the same time, twelve-month trailing IPCA inflation reached 4.31%, 5.26% and 4.49%, respectively. This behavior of food price inflation partially mirrored domestic and external supply shocks, whose impacts were possibly heightened by the high volatility environment in international financial markets. For the last four-month period, the most likely scenario indicates the continuity of this dynamics, with elevation of the headline inflation mainly determined by the increase in food prices. 
 
3. In line with the evolution of headline inflation, the three main underlying inflation measures calculated by the BCB increased between August and September. The smoothed trimmed means core inflation increased from 0.33% in August to 0.43% in September. In the same period, the double weight core inflation measure increased from 0.19% to 0.39%, and the core inflation by exclusion rose from 0.12% to 0.37%. In the year through September, the smoothed trimmed means core inflation increased 3.93%, up from 3.21% recorded in the same period of 2009. According to the same comparison basis, double weight core inflation measure increased to 3.59%, up from 3.48%, while the core inflation by exclusion reached 3.82%, up from 3.62%. Twelve-month trailing inflation measures, on its turn, reached, in September, 4.94%, 5.09% and 4.83% for the core inflation by exclusion, smoothed trimmed means and double weight core inflation measures, respectively, standing, therefore, above the midpoint of the inflation target. The IPCA diffusion index, which had retreated to 48.7% in July, reached 52.6% in August and 62.5% in September.  
 
4. The General Price Index (IGP-DI) inflation recorded 1.10% in September, the same change observed in August, but above the rate registered in July (0.22%). In the year through September, the IGP-DI inflation reached 8.04%, above the level recorded in the same period of 2009 (-1.35%). According to the same comparison basis, inflation measured by its main component, the Wholesale Price Index (IPA-DI), rose 9.95%, reflecting the increases of 8.6% and 14.1%, respectively, in industrial and agricultural prices. The 2010 IPA-DI inflation change is, therefore, above the change recorded in the same period of 2009 (-3.69%). Inflation measured by the Consumer Price Index (IPC-DI), another component of the IGP-DI, increased 3.82% in the year through September, above the 3.41% recorded in the same period of 2009. Under the same criterion, inflation measured by the Civil Construction National Index (INCC), component with the lowest weight in the IGP-DI, increased 6.45%, also above the rate recorded in the same period of 2009 (2.78%). As emphasized in previous Copom Meeting Minutes, the Copom evaluates that the effects of wholesale prices over consumer price inflation will depend, among other factors, on the current and prospective demand conditions, the exposure of each sector to external and domestic competition, as well as on the price setters’ expectations for the future inflation path. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
5. The IBGE (Statistics and Geography Brazilian Institute) released information about 2010Q2 GDP. The data showed expansion in activity, which increased 8.8% in the second quarter, year-over-year, and a 1.2% increase quarter-over-quarter. GDP growth reflected, to great extent, statistical carry over, which, in general, was observed in the demand components and supply subsectors. On the aggregate demand side, household consumption and public administration consumption increased, respectively, 6.7% and 5.1%, year-over-year. Gross fixed capital formation (FBCF) increased 26.5%, imports grew 38.8%, and exports increased 7.3%, according to the same comparison basis. Still on a year-over-year basis, the contribution of domestic demand to the Q2 GDP growth was positive (12.4 p.p.), the most remarkable one since 1995, offsetting the 3.6 p.p. negative contribution stemming from the external sector. On the aggregate supply side, still according to the same comparison basis, the services sector grew by 5.6%, while industry grew by 13.8% and agriculture, 11.4%.     
 
6. The Index of Economic Activity of the BCB (IBC-Br) incorporates estimates for the monthly production of the three sectors of the economy, as well as for products taxes and, therefore, it constitutes an important coincident indicator of economic activity. After registering positive growth rates in all months of 2009 until April 2010, the IBCBr has shown stability in the last months. In August, the IBC-Br remained stable, and changed 0.1% in July after recording stability in the previous month, suggesting, therefore, a less intense pace of economic activity than previously expected, in contrast to the fast pace observed in the first quarter of 2010.   7. After strong retreat due to the 2008/2009 crisis, industrial output recovered, but it has shown some accommodation at levels similar to those observed in the pre-crisis period. According to data seasonally adjusted by the IBGE, industrial output recorded -0.1% in August, after increasing 0.6% in July, month-on-month. The threemonth moving average growth rate reached -0.2%, considering the three-month period ended in August, equal to the rate recorded in the three-month period ended in July, and above the one registered between March and June (-0.7%). Year-over-year, the production increased 8.9% in August 2010, similar to the rate recorded in July (8.8%), according to the same comparison basis. On a twelve-month trailing basis, industrial production expanded by 9.8% in August, above the July rate (8.3%). Compared to December 2008, a record low for industrial production level registered during the 2008/2009 crisis period, recovery up to August totaled 24.2%. Industrial activity has partially been supported by the growth of industrial activity financing by public financial institutions. 
 
8. Among the industry use categories, according to data seasonally adjusted by the IBGE, the most important driver in August, month-on-month, was capital goods production, which increased by 1.4%. Consumer goods and intermediate goods production were negative, recording -0.2% and -1.5%, respectively. On a three-month moving average basis, the production for the three categories retreated: -0.1% for capital goods, -0.5% for intermediate goods and -0.4% for consumer goods. It bears highlighting that capital goods production expanded by 28.3% in the year through August, year-over-year, the most remarkable expansion among the use categories, evidencing the growth in capital goods investment as a relevant factor in the economic recovery of the post-crisis period. The future behavior of industrial production will also depend on the evolution of consumer and businessmen confidence, which should continue to be additional source of dynamism.  
 
9. The unemployment rate in the six metropolitan regions covered by the IBGE Monthly Labor Survey (PME) decreased from 6.9% in July to 6.7% in August, lower than the 8.1% observed in August 2009, according to observed data. After reaching 9.0% in March 2009, the rate not only retreated significantly until August, but it reached a historical record low (6.7%) considering the last nine years of the series, which methodology was extensively revised in 2001. Also according to the seasonally adjusted series, the rate retreated in August, monthon-month, reaching a record low for the series (6.7%). Employment, measured by the number of employed workers in the metropolitan regions, increased by 3.2% in August and also in July 2010, compared to 3.5% in June, yearover-year. Data from the Ministry of Labor and Employment (MTE) indicate that formal employment continues to present strong growth, although September data do not suggest acceleration. In September, 246.9 thousand jobs were created, compared to 252.6 thousand jobs registered in September 2009. In the first nine months of 2010, 2.20 million jobs were created, a 136% expansion relative to the same period of 2009 and the best result for the period since 1985, when the series began. Among the sectors, manufacturing industry outperformed, contributing with 38% of job creation in the month. In the year, services contributed the most (35% of total job creation). Real average earnings also increased month-on-month (1.4% in August relative to 2.2% in July).  As a consequence, real payroll expanded by 8.9% in August, year-over-year, continuing to constitute a key driver for the maintenance of domestic demand growth. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
  10. According to data seasonally adjusted by the IBGE, expanded retail sales increased 2.1% in August, 1.7% in July and 0.8% in June, month-on-month. As a consequence, the average of sales increased 0.3% in the quarter ended in August, compared to the quarter ended in May, also seasonally adjusted. The three-month moving average of expanded retail sales increased 1.5% in August. On a year-over-year basis, expanded retail sales increased 14.0% in August, 12.6% in July and 3.3% in June. All ten sectors surveyed increased month-on-month in August. The two key drivers were “books, newspapers, magazines and stationary”, with 3.5% growth and “furniture and appliances”, which increased 2.9%. In the next months it is expected that the retail sales trajectory continues to be benefited by governmental transfers, by real payroll growth, by credit expansion and by consumer confidence. 
 
11. The installed capacity utilization rate (Nuci) in the manufacturing industry, calculated by FGV, without seasonal adjustment, reached 85.9% in September, up from 85.4% in August, standing close to the levels registered prior to the 2008/2009 crisis. According to the seasonally adjusted monthly series calculated by FGV, the Nuci reached 85.0% in September (84.9% in the previous month). Among the four use categories, the Nuci in construction inputs industry was the only one to reduce (1.4 p.p.), month-on-month, reaching 89.6%, the highest among the use categories. On the other hand, the Nuci for capital goods (84.1%) increased 0.1 p.p.. The Nuci for the intermediate goods industry increased 0.3 p.p., while the Nuci for consumer goods industry increased 0.4 p.p., totaling 86.6% and 85.3%, respectively. According to the CNI series seasonally adjusted by the BCB, the Nuci decreased to 82.2% in August, after reaching 82.3% in July and 82.7% in June. Therefore, evidence suggests that the utilization rates have accommodated at high levels, and that the maintenance of the reduced idleness margin is the result of the recent economic activity expansion, still not totally offset by the maturity of completed and ongoing investment projects. It bears noticing that the absorption of capital goods increased 3.3% in August month-onmonth, and 40.0% year-over-year. The production of construction inputs also increased in August (1.1% month-onmonth and 10.8% year-over-year). On a twelve month trailing basis, expansion totaled 9.7%. As stressed in previous Copom Minutes, the inflation trajectory is closely linked to current and prospective developments related to the expansion of supply of goods and services to adequately meet demand conditions. 
 
12. The twelve-month cumulative trade balance, after reaching a US$17.1 billion surplus in August, totaled US$ 16.9 billion in September, US$9.6 billion lower than the obtained in the same period last year. This total resulted from US$186.1 billion in exports and US$169.3 billion in imports, equivalent to 17.1% and 27.8% changes, respectively, year-over-year. In fact, the greater dynamism of domestic demand relative to external demand is relevant for the reduction in the trade surplus. The behavior of remittances of profits and dividends, which also reflects the growth differential between the Brazilian economy and the economy in other countries, has contributed to elevate the twelve-month trailing current account deficit, which reached US$45.8 billion in August, equivalent to 2.3% of GDP, up from US$43.8 billion in July. On its turn, foreign direct investment reached US$27.2 billion in the last twelve months through August, equivalent to 1.4% of GDP, resulting in an additional need of foreign funding equivalent to 0.9% of GDP. 
 
13. The global economy recovery continues to be led by a group of emerging countries, whose steady pace of economic expansion is anchored mainly by domestic demand. Regarding the G3 economies (US, Euro Zone and Japan), there are evidences that the recovery process may be slower than anticipated in the first half of the year. The possibility of eventual reversion in this recovery process cannot be completely discarded, though. The US economic activity data indicate a scenario of gradual recovery from the crisis, but at a more moderate pace of growth than that recorded in the first quarter. Consumer confidence in the US reached a new record low and the signs of relevant idleness margin persist, not only in the American economy, but also in the Euro Area and in Japan. In the US, the unemployment rate remained at 9.6% of the labor force in September. In the Euro Area, the unemployment rate remained at 10.1% in August, with increasing dispersion among the regions: while in Germany the rate reduced to 6.8% - a record low since 1992 -, in Spain it increased to 20.5%. Regarding inflation rates, they have remained at very low levels in the G3 countries, despite the extremely expansionist economic policy actions, both at the fiscal and at the monetary sides. In Japan, its short term interest rate was reduced to an interval between zero and 0.1%, returning to the zero interest rate monetary policy, ended in July 2006. The monetary authority in Japan also announced a new policy of assets purchase. Finally, the possibility that also the US adopts new expansionist monetary policy actions has contributed for the acceleration of the devaluation process of the US dollar that had been observed in the last months. Among emerging markets, it bears highlighting that the Chinese central bank increased its interest rate after a long period of stability. Since the last Copom meeting, monetary 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
policy tightening has also been observed in Chile, although in a magnitude lower than previously practiced, in India and in Israel, whereas monetary policy easing has been observed in South Africa. 
 
14. For the first time in five months, oil prices, in spot and futures markets, increased to levels above U$ 80. The low predictability of the asymmetric rebound of global economy, the dependence of supply growth on the maturity pace of risky investment projects and the geopolitical complexity of the sector add uncertainty to oil prices forecasts. Nonetheless, the main scenario adopted by the Copom assumes unchanged domestic gasoline prices in 2010. However, it bears highlighting that, regardless of the behavior of domestic gasoline prices, oil prices swings might affect the domestic economy, for example, through the petrochemical sector or through expectations chains. Regarding agricultural commodities, their prices continued to record increases, with highlights for sugar, cotton and corn. Industrial commodities prices have also increased. These price increases may be explained by price movements of important currencies and commodities global demand growth. Although the recent performance of G3 economies, which represent little more than 60% of global GDP, continues modest, the demand for commodities by emerging economies has increased in a robust pace, contributing, therefore, for the prices hikes. On its turn, the volatility observed in commodities prices results from a context where financial markets adjust to new expectations of demand growth and FX markets volatility is high. 
 
Assessment of Inflation Trends                            15.  The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information. The scenario considered in the simulations was based on the following assumptions: 
 
a) the projected adjustments for gasoline and bottle gas prices for 2010 were kept unchanged at 0%; b) the projected adjustment for fixed telephone for 2010 reduced to 0.8%, down from 1.6%, which was considered in the August/ September meeting, while the projected adjustment for electricity prices for 2010 reduced to 3.6%, down from 3.7%; c) the projection for regulated prices inflation for 2010, based on individual items, was kept unchanged relative to the August/ September meeting at 3.6%, according to the benchmark scenario. This set of prices, according to data released by the IBGE, accounted for 29.35% of the total September IPCA; d) the projection for regulated prices inflation for 2011 was reduced to 4.3%, down from 4.4% considered in the August/ September meeting, according to the benchmark scenario. Such projection is based on endogenous determination models for regulated prices, which compute, among other factors, seasonal components, foreign exchange rate changes, market prices inflation and the IGP (General Price Index) change; and e) the projection for the spreads over the Selic rate, based on the 360-day swap rates, on the benchmark scenario, estimates 97 bps and 25 bps spreads in the fourth quarters of 2010 and 2011, respectively. 
 
16. Regarding fiscal policy, projections assume the achievement of a public sector primary surplus target of 3.3% of GDP in 2010. This percentage can be reduced by up to 0.90 p.p., due to the implementation of the projects linked to the Growth Acceleration Program (PAC), of which 0.44 p.p. refers to amounts to be paid from 2009. Moreover, it is expected that the primary surplus in 2011 would return, without adjustments, to 3.3% of GDP in 2011 and 2012. The additional assumptions considered in the previous meeting remained unchanged. 
 
17. Since the last Copom meeting, the median of the expectations compiled by the BCB’s Investor Relations Group (Gerin) for the 2010 IPCA increased from 5.07% to 5.20%. For 2011, the median of inflation expectations increased from 4.87% to 4.99%.  
 
18. The benchmark scenario assumes the maintenance of the exchange rate at R$1.65/US$1.00 and the Selic rate at 10.75% p.a. during the forecast period. Under this scenario, the projection for the 2010 inflation increased relative to the figure considered at the August/ September Copom meeting, and is considerably above the 4.50% midpoint target established by the National Monetary Council (CMN). According to the market scenario – which incorporates the consensus exchange and Selic rates trajectories collected by Gerin at the period immediately prior 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 
to the Copom meeting - IPCA inflation forecast for 2010 also increased, and it stands considerably above the inflation midpoint target. For 2011, under both the benchmark and the market scenarios, the projection increased relative to the figure considered at the August/ September Copom meeting, but it remains around the inflation midpoint target. Regarding the third quarter of 2012, in both scenarios, the projection is around the inflation midpoint target. 
 
Monetary Policy Decision 
 
19. The Copom evaluates that the monetary policy should contribute to the consolidation of a favorable longerterm macroeconomic environment. In this respect, the Copom reassures that, under the inflation-targeting regime, it guides its decisions according to projected inflation and based on the analysis of several alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that determine the price dynamics. The Committee also understands that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reduce uncertainties regarding the future behavior of headline inflation, facilitate the assessment of scenarios by the monetary authority, and help the process of coordination of economic agents’ expectations, mainly price setters’. It is additionally noteworthy that low risks for the underlying inflation in the short run tend to reinforce the effects of monetary policy actions, enabling them to affect in a more long-lasting manner the dynamics of headline inflation in the future. Although the Copom recognizes that other actions of macroeconomic policy may influence the price trajectory, it reaffirms its view that it is the responsibility of the monetary policy to remain especially vigilant to guarantee that pressures detected in shorter horizons do not spread to longer horizons. 
 
20. International evidence, ratified by the Brazilian experience, indicates that high inflation rates lead to the increase in risk premium, both for private and public funding, and to the shortening of planning horizons, both for households and corporate. Consequently, high inflation rates reduce investment and the economic growth potential, in addition to presenting regressive effects on income distribution. Moreover, high inflation rates do not result in any lasting results for economic growth and employment level; on the contrary, they create permanent damage to these variables in the medium and long terms. Therefore, the Copom strategy aims to ensure the convergence of inflation towards the targets path in 2010 and in the next years, which requires that possible deviations from the target path be promptly corrected. Such strategy takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and is the most adequate to deal with the uncertainty inherent to the process of monetary policy formulation and implementation. 
 
21. As a consequence of the stabilization and correction of unbalances, which determined important structural changes, the process of maturing of the inflation targets stands at advanced stage, and it reflects favorably in the dynamics of neutral interest rate and in the power of monetary policy. Evidences under this respect can be observed, among other factors, through the accomplishment of inflation targets in the last six years, at the same time that real interest rates have reduced. Progress in the financial markets structure, the FX and inflationary risk premium reduction, among other factors, seem to have resulted in significant reduction of the neutral rate. The generation of primary surpluses consistent with the maintenance of decreasing trend for the public debt/GDP ratio also contributed for it. From another point-of-view, some of these developments, combined to others, such as the extension of contract tenures, also suggest that the power of monetary policy in Brazil has increased in the last years. Despite the substantial uncertainty that surrounds the calculation of non-observable variables, it should be emphasized that this perception is supported by estimates generated by macroeconometric models used by the Copom. In addition, it is also noteworthy that, according to half of the analysts who responded to the consultation carried out by the BCB, the neutral rate in Brazil would currently be at levels equal to or lower than 6.50%. The Committee also considers that there are evidences that the traction of monetary policy increased in the recent past and, compared to what was observed some years ago, currently inflationary pressures are contained with more efficiency by monetary policy actions. 
 
22. In international markets, risk aversion and volatility have remained high since the last Copom meeting, with higher prospects for the increase of global liquidity. Concerns about European countries sovereign debt and the deceleration in China remain elevated, as well as about the sustainability of the US economy recovery. Even so, the prices of some commodities and Brazilian assets increased and, overall, prospects for external funding for the Brazilian economy remain favorable. Meanwhile, the trajectory of price indices evidences the cooling of inflationary pressures in some relevant economies, whereas concerns regarding the prospects of deflation in other economies 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 
remain. In this context, the probability of some influence of external disinflation over domestic inflation remains high, although uncertainty about the behavior of asset and commodities prices persists in a context of substantial volatility in international financial markets. Regardless of how these aspects of the international outlook evolve, the Copom reaffirms its view that the main challenge of monetary policy is to ensure that the favorable results obtained over the last years are preserved. 
 
23. Although the accommodation observed in the last two quarters has been more intense than expected at the start of the year, as evidenced, among others, by data on inventories and industrial production, the prospects for the evolution of domestic economic activity remain favorable. This assessment is supported, among other factors, by signs that the expansion of credit supply tends to persist, despite at a more moderate pace, both for individuals and corporate, and by the fact that consumers and businessmen confidence stands at historically high levels, notwithstanding some accommodation at the margin. The Copom considers, additionally, that the dynamism of domestic activity will continue to be benefited by the vigor of labor market, despite the cooling in the generation of jobs in specific segments. 
 
24. The Copom emphasizes, once more, that there are time lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its effects on both economic activity and inflation. Therefore, the assessment of alternative stances for monetary policy should necessarily focus on the forward-looking inflationary scenario and its risks, instead of current and past inflation figures. The prospective scenario substantially deteriorated early this year, but this dynamic has reversed, greatly mirroring less favorable prospects for global activity and the monetary policy actions implemented this year. Since the last meeting, however, the short-term scenario was negatively influenced by the dynamics of food prices, which partially reflects supply shocks. Despite the difficulty in identifying the nature of these shocks, and their intensity, duration and the possibility of reversal, monetary policy should act to prevent its propagation, the so-called second-order effects. 
 
25. The high contribution of food prices to headline inflation, when compared to historical standards, suggests the ongoing materialization of short-term risks that had been identified and taken into account in the balance of risks assessed at the last Copom meeting. However, the prevailing view is that the convergence of inflation to the midpoint target tends to materialize. For that, the Copom finds support in the pertinent considerations that monetary policy acts with time lags over activity and inflation, and that the effects of the adjustment process in the base interest rate initiated in April 2010 haven’t completely materialized yet. Moreover, it is worth noticing that this hypothesis of convergence is subject to the materialization of the trajectories regarding fiscal and credit variables which the Committee considers. Anyway, the Committee ensures that, in case this scenario does not promptly materialize, the monetary policy stance should be adjusted in order to guarantee the convergence between the pace of demand and supply expansions. From another point-of-view, in case inflation does not promptly converge to the midpoint target established by the CMN, monetary policy will act in order to redirect price dynamics and, therefore, ensure the target to be fulfilled. 
 
26. The intensity and frequency of shocks that both the global and Brazilian economies have undergone in recent years impose additional challenges to the analysis of the prospective scenario. Evidence in this respect are manifested, for example, in the bimodal character of analysts’ view polled by the BCB, as some participants perceive a benign inflation scenario, in which the Selic rate would remain stable in the relevant horizon, while other participants show skepticism and advocate the base rate. On its turn, the Committee recognizes an economic environment in which the uncertainty level prevails above the usual, where the remaining risks for the consolidation of a benign inflationary scenario stem from the domestic outlook. For instance, it bears highlighting those deriving from domestic demand expansion, in a context of narrow idleness margin in the use of production factors. Regarding this point, it is important to highlight that some stability has been recently observed in the capacity utilization rate at high levels, as well as some moderation in the dynamism of the labor market (exception for public administration). In this context, it seems plausible to affirm that the factors that support these domestic risks have decelerated. Moreover, there are signs that the economy has moved towards a trajectory closer to long-term equilibrium and, therefore, the effects of demand pressures and of the high level of utilization of factors over the balance of risks for inflation tend to cool down. 
 
27. In short, since the last meeting, the short-term risks considered by the Copom at that time have materialized. Still, the current balance of risks still points to the accomplishment of a benign scenario, in which inflation would 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 
remain consistent with the inflation targets path, which is largely due to the adjustment of the base rate implemented since April. Also contributing to this scenario is the new information released since then, indicating an improvement in the balance of risks related to the regulated prices dynamics, as well as that the slowdown of economic activity in the last two quarters was more intense than the projected at the start of the year. Regarding the external outlook, the probability of deceleration, and even reversion, of the already slow process of recovery of G3 economies remains high. As a consequence, the influence of the international scenario over domestic inflation behavior shows some disinflationary bias. 
 
28. Under these considerations, evaluating the macroeconomic outlook and the inflation prospects, the Copom unanimously decided to maintain the Selic rate at 10.75% p.a., without bias. 
 
29. Domestic demand is robust, largely due to the effects of stimulus factors, such as income growth and credit expansion. Moreover, although they tend to cool down, fiscal and credit incentives have been provided to the economy in recent quarters, and should still contribute for the consolidation of activity expansion and, hence, for the maintenance of the idleness margin of factors at low levels. The effects of these stimuli, however, are counterbalanced by the effects of the reversal of substantial share of the initiatives taken during the recent 2008/2009 international financial crisis, by those referring to the worsening of the global economy prospects and especially by those stemming from the change in the monetary policy stance. These elements are an important part of the context in which future monetary policy decisions will be taken, aiming to ensure a timely convergence of inflation to the targets path. 
 
30. At the end of the meeting it was announced that the Committee will reconvene on December 7th, 2010 for technical presentations and, on the following day, to discuss the monetary policy decision, as established in Communiqué 18,927 of October 9th, 2009. 
 
SUMMARY OF DATA ANALYZED BY THE COPOM 
 
Inflation 
 
31. The IPCA rose 0.45% in September, up from 0.04% in August and 0.01% in July. The index increased by 3.60% in the year and 4.70% in twelve months, compared to 4.49% recorded in the year through August.    32. The IPCA acceleration in September reflected especially the greater variation in market prices, which reached 0.56% in the month, up from 0.06% in August. The change in regulated prices also contributed to a higher IPCA rate in the month, reaching 0.19%, compared to -0.01% in August. The behavior of market prices reflected mainly the acceleration of the prices of tradable goods, whose rate increased from 0.12% in August to 0.88% in September. Similarly, the prices of non-tradable goods increased from 0.01% to 0.28%, despite the stability in the change of services prices, 0.41% in August and September. Considering the behavior of the IPCA by groups, it is worth noticing the increase of 1.08% in the prices of food and beverages, group that had been the main driver of the relative price stability in the two preceding months, contributing 0.24 p.p. to the IPCA change in September. The diffusion index reached 62.5%, up from 52.6% in August and 48.7% in July.   33. The changes in the three IPCA core inflation measures have accelerated in September month-on-month. The smoothed trimmed-means core inflation increased 0.43%, up from 0.33% in the previous month, totaling 5.09% in twelve months, compared to 5.05% in August. Core inflation by exclusion, which excludes ten items of household food and the items related to vehicle fuel, rose 0.37% in September, up from 0.12% in August, accumulating 4.94% in twelve months, up from 4.87% in the previous month. The double weight core inflation increased 0.39% in September, up from 0.19% in August, accumulating 4.83% in twelve months, unchanged relative to the previous month.    34. The IGP-DI increased 1.10% in September, unchanged relative to August, totaling an 8.04% increase in the year and 7.95% in twelve months. The Wholesale Price Index (IPA) increased by 1.47% in September, down from 1.70% in August, influenced exclusively by the acceleration of agricultural prices, from 2.68% to 5.15%, considering the slowdown in the change of industrial prices, from 1.40% to 0.31%. In the last twelve months through 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 
September, the IPA increased 9.51%, due to increases of 12.48% and 8.56% in the prices of agricultural and industrial products, respectively. The main drivers of wholesale prices were corn, contributing 0.34 p.p.; cattle, 0.22 p.p.; and poultry 0.17 p.p. The IPC-DI increased by 0.46% in September, up from -0.08% in August, totaling 4.36% in twelve months. The INCC rose 0.21% in September, up from 0.14% in August, reaching 6.94% in the last twelve months.   Economic Activity 
 
35. The IBC-Br showed stability in August, after increasing by 0.1% in July, considering seasonally adjusted data. For the quarter ended in August, the IBC-Br also showed stability (0.01%), compared to the quarter ended in May. The indicator increased 9.2% in the year through August and 7.4% in twelve months.   36. Expanded retail sales recorded growth at the margin for the fourth consecutive month, increasing by 2.1% in August, month-on-month, after increasing 1.7% in July and 0.8% in June, according to data seasonally adjusted by the IBGE’s monthly survey (PMC). According to month-on-month seasonally adjusted data, sales increased in all ten segments surveyed, with highlights for the increases recorded by books, newspapers, magazines and stationery (3.5%); furniture and appliances (2.9%); pharmaceutical and medical articles (2.6%); and vehicles, motorcycles, parts and pieces (2.4%). For the quarter ended in August, retail sales grew 0.3%, quarter-on-quarter.   37. Expanded retail sales grew 14% in August, year-over-year, accumulating increases of 12.2% in the year and 12.3% in the last twelve months. All segments increased year-over-year, with highlights for office material and equipment (24.7%); construction inputs (19.9%); and vehicles, motorcycles, parts and pieces (19.3%). In the year, sales also increased for all segments, especially those regarding office material and equipment (24.8%); furniture and appliances (18.9%); and construction inputs (16.4%). Expanded retail sales in the last twelve months through August, compared to the same previous period, also shows generalized increase by activity, with highlights to the rise in office material and equipment (18%) and vehicles, motorcycles, parts and pieces (16.8%); and furniture and appliances (15.1%).   38. Automobile sales by dealers, including cars, light commercial vehicles, trucks and buses, reduced 1.8% in September, month-on-month, according to Fenabrave (Brazilian Federation of Automotive Vehicles Distribution) data, seasonally adjusted by the BCB. It bears highlighting the 10.4% fall in the sales of trucks. Total sales decreased 0.5%, year-over-year, a result influenced by the 6.1% decrease in automobile sales. The other categories - trucks, buses and light commercial vehicles - showed significant increases of 31.3%, 21.2% and 21.1%, respectively, year-over-year. In the year and in the last twelve months through September, automobile sales increased respectively 8.7% and 14.7%, reflecting stronger sales in all segments.    39. Capital goods imports increased 2.2% in August, month-on-month, according to the Funcex quantum index, seasonally adjusted by the BCB. Year-over-year, the indicator rose 88.2%, while in the year and on a twelve-month trailing basis, it increased 38.2% and 17.9%, respectively, compared to the same periods of the previous year.   40. Capital goods production increased 1.4% in August, month on month, resulting in a decrease of 0.5% in the quarter ended in August, quarter-on-quarter, according to data from the Monthly Industrial Survey (PIM) by IBGE. Major advances in production in August, month-on-month, were recorded in the segments of capital goods for construction (5.9%), capital goods for the power sector (5.4%); and capital goods for non-serial industrial purposes (4.5%). Among the sectors that recorded declines in production, it bears highlighting capital goods for agriculture (4.4%). For the year, capital goods production increased 28.3%, with an emphasis on the production for construction, which increased by 155.6%.   41. Industrial production decreased 0.1% in August, month-on-month, after changing 0.6% in July, according to seasonally adjusted data from the PIM-PF. By use categories, capital goods production outperformed, while other categories declined, with emphasis on the decrease of 1.5% in intermediate goods. Considering industry activities, the major changes were observed in machines and equipment (5.6%), medical equipment (5%), other transport equipment (4.5%) and publishing, printing and reproduction (4.1%). The main negative drivers were electronic material and communication equipment (-6.5%), basic metallurgy (-5.8%), tobacco (-5.6%) and pharmaceutical products (-5.5%). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 
 
42. Industrial production increased 8.9%, year-over-year, with special emphasis on the production of capital goods (28%), intermediate goods (8.7%), durable consumer goods (4.7%) and semi- and non-durable consumer goods (4.3%). On a twelve-month trailing basis, general industry grew 9.8% in August, year-over-year, with highlights to the increases in the production of durable consumer goods (15.5%), capital goods (14.2%) and intermediate goods (10.9%).  
 
43. The Nuci in the manufacturing industry, calculated by FGV, reached 85.9% in September, corresponding to 85% seasonally adjusted, a 0.1 p.p. increase relative to the previous month, seasonally adjusted, and a 3.1 p.p. increase year-over-year. The increase in the installed capacity utilization rate was observed in all use categories for both comparison bases, except for construction material: durable consumer goods (0.4 p.p. and 1.2 p.p.), intermediate goods (0.3 p.p. and 3.5 p.p.), capital goods (0.1 p.p. and 7.2 p.p.) and construction material (-1.4 p.p. and 0.7 p.p.). 
 
44. Vehicles production reached 308.1 thousand units in September, according to data released by the Anfavea and seasonally adjusted by BCB, representing a downfall of 1.5% relative to August. The sector production expanded by 12.7% year-over-year, by 17.3% in the year and by 23.1% in the last twelve months through September. 
 
45. Vehicles sales decreased 1% in September, month-on-month, exclusively influenced by a 2.1% fall in domestic market sales, while exports expanded by 2.5%. In the year and in the last twelve months, domestic sales increased by 5.8% and 15%, respectively, while exports expanded by 76.3% and 48.6%. 
 
46. The LSPA survey carried out by the IBGE in September projected an 11.1% annual expansion for grains in 2010, representing 148.9 million tons, 2% above the 2008 record high. Compared to 2009, the growth projection for the year reflected especially the upward movements of corn (8.5%), soybeans (20.6%) and wheat (10%). 
 
Surveys and Expectations 
 
47. According to the Consumer Expectations Survey carried out by the FGV nationwide, the Consumer Confidence Index (ICC) increased 0.7% in September, month-on-month seasonally adjusted, reaching 121.7 points. The result was influenced by the 3.5% increase in the Current Situation Index (ISA), which reached a historical record high for the sixth consecutive month, while the Expectation Index (IE) decreased by 1.1%. Yearover-year, the ICC increased 9.9%, reflecting increases of 22.9% in ISA and of 2.5% in IE. 
 
48. The Industry Confidence Index (ICI) from FGV increased 0.4% in September, reaching 113.4 points, considering seasonally adjusted data, as a result of the 1.3% increase in the IE, whereas the ISA decreased 0.3%. Year-over-year, the ICI grew 9%, reflecting increases of 10.6% in the ISA and of 7.3% in the IE. In the last two months, there was decrease in optimism about the industry at present and recovery in relation to the future situation. 
 
49. The Services Confidence Index (ICS) from FGV reduced 1.1% in September month-on-month, after increasing by 4.1% in the previous month, influenced by the falls of 1% in the Current Situation Index (ISA-S) and 1.2% in the Expectation Index (IE-S). However, the September ICS stood at 0.6% above the 2010 average and 5.2% above the September 2009 index. The quarter ended in September showed a 0.3% decrease in the ICS, quarter-on-quarter. 
 
50. The Consumer Confidence Index (ICC) from Fecomercio SP reduced 4.1% in October month-on-month, influenced by the falls of 4.9% in the Index of Current Economic Conditions (ICEA) and 3 6% in the Consumer Expectation Index (IEC). In the year through October, the ICC increased 16.3%. 
 
Labor Market 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 
51. According to the General Record of Employment and Unemployment (Caged) of the Ministry of Labor and Employment (MTE), 246.9 thousand formal jobs were created in September, increasing 0.3% month-on-month, considered seasonally adjusted data. In the year through September, 2,201.4 thousand jobs were created, a record high for the series, which started in January 1985. According to the same comparison basis, hiring registered a record in expansion in the services sector (774.1 thousand), in manufacturing industry (600.3 thousand), in civil construction (330.2 thousand) and in commerce (292.5 thousand). The net creation of formal employment exceeds by 136% the figure recorded in the same period of 2009, while formal employment increased by 6% in the same period, according the same comparison basis. Regarding the activity sectors mentioned above, formal employment increased 5.5%, 6%, 14.1% and 6.2%, respectively. In September, it bears highlighting the hiring in the service sector (94.2 thousand), in the manufacturing industry (94.2 thousand) and in commerce (55.1 thousand). In the last twelve months through September, 2,263.9 thousand formal jobs were created in the country. 
 
52. According to the IBGE employment survey (PME), carried out in the six main metropolitan regions of the country, the unemployment rate declined for the third consecutive month, reaching 6.7% in August, a historical record low, declining 0.2 p.p. month-on-month and 1.4 p.p. year-over-year. In seasonally adjusted terms, the unemployment rate also reached 6.7% in August, declining 0.2 p.p month-on-month, as a result of falls from 0.3% in the Economically Active Population (PEA) and 0.1% in occupation. According to the same survey, average real earnings usually earned by workers increased 1.4% month-on-month and 2.6% in the year through August, contributing for payroll growth, 1.9% and 6.2%, according the same comparison bases.  
 
Credit and Delinquency Rates 
 
53. Outstanding credit in the financial system reached R$1,583 billion in August, equivalent to 46.2% of GDP, increasing by 2.2% in the month, 11.9% in the year and 19.2% in twelve months. Non-earmarked credit operations increased by 1.7%, 9.1% and 14.5%, according to the same comparison bases. Among non-earmarked operations, credit operations to individuals increased 1.7% in the month and 10.7% in the year and 17.1% in twelve months, while those relative to corporate increased 1.7%, 7.6% and 11.9%, according to the same comparison bases. Earmarked credit operations increased 3.3% in the month, 17.7% in the year and 29.6% in twelve months, with highlights for the rises of 3.9%, 31.2% and 51.1% recorded in housing credit and of 6%, 30.1% and 50.5% recorded in BNDES disbursements, according to the same comparison bases. 
 
54. The average interest rate on non-earmarked credit operations, used as reference for interest rates, decreased 0.2 p.p. in August, reaching 35.2%. The average annual rate on credit for individuals reached 39.9% in August, decreasing by 0.6 p.p. relative to July. The average rate on corporate credit totaled 28.9% in August, increasing by 0.2 p.p. relative to July. 
 
55. The average tenure on non-earmarked credit operations, used as reference for interest rates, increased in August, reaching 457 days, up from 452 days in July. This expansion mirrored the rises in the average tenure of credit for individuals and corporate (9 days and 1 day, respectively), which totaled 536 days and 386 days, following the same order. 
 
56. Delinquency rates in the financial system (non-earmarked loans used as reference for interest rates, in arrears for more than ninety days) reduced 0.1 p.p. in August, reaching 4.8%. After reaching the 5.9% record high in August 2009, the delinquency rate has been showing a consistent declining path. Delinquency rates for credit operations with corporate remained stable at 3.6%, while those regarding credit to individuals declined 0.1 p.p., reaching 6.2% in August. 
 
External Environment   57. According to International Monetary Fund (IMF) projections released at the start of October, global economy should grow by 4.8% in 2010 and 4.2% in 2011, revising the July estimates, which signaled 4.6% and 4.3%, respectively. According to the observed since the beginning of the financial crisis, the global economic dynamics has remained driven mainly by the emerging economies, which are expected to grow by 7.1% this year, while among developed economies, growth is expected to reach 2.7%. In the US, despite the consumption increase, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 
considering that the labor market still remains weak, 2010 GDP growth should reach 2.6%, compared to the previous forecast of 3.3%. The 2011 projection has also been reviewed, retreating to 2.3%, down from 2.9%. 
 
58. In the commodities market, agricultural prices hiked, increasing 15.7% in dollar terms since the last Copom meeting, mainly as a result of the dollar depreciation, the strengthening of Chinese demand and adverse weather conditions. Similarly, the metallic and energy commodities rose 12.1% and 9.8% in the period. Despite this bias, as the mature economies continue to present significant output gap, price indices are tamed. In the US, driven by the declining path of inflationary cores, the Federal Reserve (Fed) concerns intensified, imposing to the monetary authority to manifest regarding that the current prices level is incompatible with its maximum employment and price stability mandate.  
 
59. In this context, the central banks of G4 economies maintained the accommodative stance of their policies, with the Bank of Japan (BoJ) announcing a new stage of quantitative easing and the reintroduction of the zero interest rate policy (ZIRP). In the emerging economies, despite some basic interest rate rises, as occurred in Peru, Chile and India, the monetary policy stance continues to support economic growth, as central banks have maintained the basic interest rates below the levels observed prior to the beginning of the crisis, with the perception that it will be necessary to continue to delay the withdrawal of monetary stimuli introduced during that period. The evaluation is partially due to the perception of the likely deepening of the accommodative stance adopted by the Fed, which has implied in persistent dollar devaluation, to the demand increase of 10-year government securities relative to mature economies, whose yields remain in a low path, and to the frequent interventions in the FX market, especially in emerging economies (Colombia, Peru, Malaysia, Thailand, India, South Africa and Turkey, among others). 
 
60. It is important to highlight that since the last Copom meeting, the financial markets have been characterized by deep dollar devaluation, lower risk aversion, the stock market valuation and volatility reduction, according to the VIX index. The VIX index retreated to twenty-point level, standing close to the values recorded at the end of April, before the fiscal crisis deepening in European countries.  
 
Foreign Trade and International Reserves 
 
61. The Brazilian trade surplus reached US$1.1 billion in September, accumulating US$12.8 billion in the first nine months of the year. In the month, exports totaled US$18.8 billion, and imports, US$17.7 billion. On a daily average basis, the trade surplus fell by 40% year-over-year, mirroring a 45.1% growth in imports and a 28.9% growth in exports. Total external trade accumulated US$277.1 billion in the year, growing by 36.2% relative to the first nine months of 2009. 
 
62. International reserves reached US$275.2 billion in September, recording a US$13.9 billion growth month-onmonth and a US$36.7 billion growth in the year. The monetary authority's interventions accounted for net purchases of US$10.8 billion in the domestic market, in the month, accumulating US$ 29.4 billion in the first nine months of 2010. 
 
Money Market and Open Market Operations 
 
63. Since the September Copom meeting, the futures interest rate yield curve shifted upwards for longer-term tenors (above one year), mainly driven by the release of more-pressured inflation indices; by the increase of Focus survey inflationary expectations and by the release of robust data for activity, employment and credit. Between August 30th and September 29th, one-, two- and three-year rates increased by 0.08 p.p., 0.28 p.p. and 0.29 p.p., respectively. However, from September 29th, these rates started a declining trajectory, mirrored by the release of below-than-expected domestic activity indicators; by the signals of low recovery of US economy and by the expectation of new monetary easing measures in developed economies. Therefore, on October 18th, the domestic interest rate yield curve stood almost at the same level recorded at the end of August. Between August 30th and October 18th, one-, three- and six-month rates decreased by 0.03 p.p., 0.04 p.p. and 0.05 p.p., respectively. The one- and three-year rates decreased by 0.08 p.p., and 0.01 p.p., respectively, while the two-year rate increased by 0.03 p.p. Real interest rates, measured by the differential between the one-year forward nominal interest rate and the smoothed twelve-month-ahead inflation expectations, fell from 5.89% on August 30th to 5.68% on October 18th. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 
 
64. In its open market operations, the BCB carried out, between August 31st and October 18th, repo operations borrowing R$ 47.7 billion for a six-month period. As a consequence, the average daily balance of the long operations reached R$ 117.7 billion. In the same period, the BCB also borrowed money through repo operations with tenures between 12 and 33 working days, increasing the average daily balance of short-term borrowing operations to US$218.4 billion. The BCB also borrowed money through 33 overnight repo operations and conducted daily, at the end of day, two-working-day tenure liquidity management operations. The very short-term operations, including the two-working-day tenure liquidity management operations, averaged a daily balance of R$65.9 billion in the period, borrowing. The average daily balance of the total stock of repurchase agreement of the Central Bank increased from R$ 387.3 billion between July 20th and August 30th to R$ 402.0 billion, between August 31st and October 18th. Considering the daily balance of operations for the most recent period, there was a rise in the repurchase agreements totaling R$ 53.5 billion, elevating the total stock from R$ 369.5 billion on August 30th to R$ 422.9 billion on October 18th. The main drivers of liquidity expansion in the period were the BCB interventions in the FX market, the net expenses of the Union and the net redemption of federal public securities. 
 
65. Between August 31st and October 18th, the National Treasury issuance regarding the traditional auctions raised a total of R$64.8 billion. The issuance of fixed-rate securities reached R$43.2 billion, with R$33.2 billion via issuance of LTNs maturing in 2011 and 2013, and R$10.0 billion via NTN-Fs maturing in 2015, 2017 and 2021. Issuance of LFTs totaled R$12.1 billion, for securities maturing in 2014, 2015, 2016 and 2017. Issuance of inflationlinked NTN-Bs reached R$9.5 billion, for securities maturing in 2013, 2015, 2020, 2040 and 2050. 