Since the previous meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee, the expected 
cutback in quantitative easing by the US Fed has begun. Although the initial 
response in global financial markets was generally fairly muted, emerging 
markets have subsequently experienced a high degree of turbulence, particularly 
in the wake of renewed fears of a slowdown in China. While the Fed action 
signals a recovery in the US, and the UK economic outlook is also improving, it 
does not mean that the global financial crisis is over. Rather, we are now entering 
a phase of the crisis that is creating new challenges for emerging market 
economies.  
 
In the longer run a sustained recovery in the US should be positive for the global 
economy in general, but the adjustment to the withdrawal of quantitative easing is 
likely to create significant short to medium-term challenges. How to respond to a 

 
MPC Statement January 29th 2014 Page 2 
 
2 
combination of sharply depreciating currencies, capital outflows, slowing growth, 
rising inflation, significant current account and/or fiscal deficits and deteriorating 
confidence is posing policy challenges and very difficult trade-offs for many 
emerging markets.  
 
The rand exchange rate has been one of the currencies affected by these 
developments, and the recent depreciation of the rand, if sustained, will raise 
significantly the risk to the inflation outlook. Our inflation forecast shows a marked 
deterioration, despite the absence of clear evidence of domestic demand 
pressures. 
 
The recent inflation data reflects positive outcomes that belie the incipient risks, 
largely from the depreciation of the currency, that our forecasts highlight. The 
year-on-year inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) for all 
urban areas measured 5,3 per cent in November 2013 and 5,4 per cent in 
December, resulting in an average annual inflation rate of 5,7 per cent for 2013. 
Food and non-alcoholic beverage price inflation continued to moderate from a 
recent peak of 7,1 per cent in August, to 3,8 per cent in November and 3,5 per 
cent in December. The contribution of this category to the average CPI increase 
was 0,5 percentage points in December compared with 0,6 percentage points in 
the previous month. The petrol price, which was the main contributor to the 
higher overall inflation in December, increased at a year-on-year rate of 10,0 per 
cent, up from 7,7 per cent in November. Core inflation, which excludes food, 

 
MPC Statement January 29th 2014 Page 3 
 
3 
petrol and electricity, has been unchanged at 5,3 per cent for the four months to 
December, while administered price inflation excluding petrol measured 6,8 per 
cent. The headline producer price inflation for final manufactured goods 
measured 5,8 per cent in November, compared with 6,3 per cent in October. 
  
The headline inflation forecast of the Bank has deteriorated since the previous 
meeting of the MPC, mainly as a result of revisions to the assumptions regarding 
the rand exchange rate. The forecast average inflation rate for 2014 is 0,6 
percentage points higher at 6,3 per cent, and 0,6 percentage points higher at 6,0 
per cent in 2015, with inflation expected to average 5,9 per cent in the final 
quarter of that year. Inflation is expected breach the upper end of the target 
range in the second quarter of 2014, and to reach a peak of 6,6 per cent in the 
final quarter of the year, before declining to 6,0 per cent in the second quarter of 
2015. 
  
Core inflation, which averaged 5,2 per cent in 2013, is expected to average 5,8 
per cent in 2014, compared with 5,6 per cent in the previous forecast, while the 
forecast for 2015 has increased from 5,3 per cent to 5,9 per cent. The 
deterioration in this measure of underlying inflation continues to be driven 
primarily by the lagged effects of the depreciation of the rand exchange rate. 
  
Inflation expectations appear to have remained relatively anchored at the upper 
end of the target range. According to the survey conducted in the fourth quarter 

 
MPC Statement January 29th 2014 Page 4 
 
4 
of 2013 by the Bureau for Economic Research at Stellenbosch University, 
average inflation expectations of respondents measured 6,1 per cent for both 
2014 and 2015 and have remained more or less unchanged since 2011. There 
is, however, some divergence between the average expectations of respondents, 
which range between 5,6 per cent and 6,4 per cent in 2014, and 5,5 per cent and 
6,5 per cent in 2015. Financial analysts have the lowest forecasts, which are also 
reflected in the latest Reuters survey that indicates expectations of 5,6 per cent 
and 5,5 per cent in 2014 and 2015 respectively.  
 
While the economic growth outlook for a number of emerging market economies 
has deteriorated somewhat in recent months, the prospects in the advanced 
economies have improved, particularly in the US and the UK. However, the 
recovery remains uneven and not without risks. In the US, growth is being driven 
by a recovery in the housing market, robust private sector demand, and a 
dissipation of the negative impulse from fiscal consolidation. In its latest World 
Economic Outlook (WEO) update, the IMF forecasts growth of 2,8 per cent in 
2014 for the US, compared with 1,9 per cent in 2013. The outlook for the 
Eurozone remains fragile and uneven, particularly in the Southern periphery 
where the risk of deflation, strong fiscal consolidation and weak banking sectors 
are constraining the recovery. Eurozone growth in 2014 is expected to remain 
subdued at around 1,0 per cent.  
 

 
MPC Statement January 29th 2014 Page 5 
 
5 
The Japanese economy has maintained its positive growth but there are still 
doubts about its sustainability in the absence of continued fiscal stimulus. The 
outlook for the Chinese economy is increasingly uncertain, given the challenge of 
containing the excessive increase in credit extension without adversely impacting 
on growth. Although a growth rate of around 7,5 per cent is still generally 
expected, the latest PMI, which suggests a contraction of industrial production, 
indicates some downside risk to this outlook. This uncertainty has contributed to 
increased risk aversion and volatility in financial markets of emerging economies 
in recent weeks, and is also likely to impact negatively on commodity prices.  
 
Significant currency depreciation and weaker growth prospects are also evident 
in a number of other large emerging economies, particularly Brazil, Russia and 
Turkey, while the outlook for the Indian economy appears to have improved 
somewhat.  
 
Global inflation remains benign despite abundant liquidity. However, spillover 
effects from increasingly divergent monetary policies are creating a difficult and 
volatile environment for emerging markets. There is still some uncertainty 
regarding the pace of tapering by the Fed in the coming months, and although 
market expectations are that the US policy rate is unlikely to increase before at 
least mid-2015, long term bond yields have increased to around 2,8 per cent from 
around 1,6 per cent in May 2013. A further sustained improvement in UK growth 
and employment trends has brought forward the prospect of monetary tightening 

 
MPC Statement January 29th 2014 Page 6 
 
6 
by the Bank of England. However, monetary policy is expected to remain highly 
accommodative in Japan and the Eurozone where the risk of deflation persists. 
  
The expectation of tapering by the Fed since May 2013 resulted in significant 
outflows from emerging economies domestic bond and equity markets, putting 
pressure on exchange rates and long term bond yields, particularly in those 
countries with sizeable current account deficits. Some countries, including Brazil, 
Turkey, Indonesia and India, responded by tightening monetary policy, either in 
reaction to inflationary pressures or in an attempt to stem the depreciation. Since 
May 2013, cumulative interest rate increases have amounted to 300 basis points 
in Brazil and 75 basis points in India. The most recent instance has been Turkey 
which raised its overnight interest rate (MFR) by 425 basis points to 12 per cent. 
  
The impact of these developments on the rand exchange rate has resulted in a 
marked increase in the upside risk to the inflation forecast, despite the relatively 
muted pass-through to date. Since the previous MPC meeting, the rand has 
depreciated by about 7,4 per cent against the US dollar, by 9,0 per cent against 
the euro and by 8,0 per cent on a trade weighted basis. Year to date the 
rand/dollar depreciation has been about 3,5 per cent.  
 
In the final two months of 2013, total net sales by non-residents of South African 
domestic government bonds and equities amounted to R21,0 bn and R19,4bn 
respectively. These flows effectively reversed the inflows that occurred during the 

 
MPC Statement January 29th 2014 Page 7 
 
7 
earlier part of the year, with net purchases of bond and equities for 2013 by non
residents amounting to R1,3 bn, compared with R85,2 bn for 2012. Year-to-date 
net sales of equities and bonds have totaled R19,3 bn, of which R15,6 bn were 
bonds. 
 
While the recent rand weakness is part of a general emerging market 
phenomenon, it has been reinforced by idiosyncratic factors including declining 
terms of trade, on-going labour disputes, and the higher-than-expected current 
account deficit in the third quarter.  
 
Although to date the current account has been slow to react to the depreciation of 
the rand, the trade surplus of R0,8 bn recorded in November may signify a 
possible narrowing of the current account deficit in the fourth quarter of 2013. 
However, given the volatility of the monthly trade data, it is too early to assess 
whether or not this is the beginning of a sustainable trend. The extent to which 
the strikes in the mining sector and resulting decline in exports are likely to 
impede the current account adjustment further will depend on the duration of the 
strikes and the extent to which lost output can be compensated for by running 
down inventories. 
 
The economic growth outlook remains subdued amid continued low business 
confidence. Growth in the fourth quarter of 2013 is estimated to have recovered 
somewhat from the low base of 0,7 per cent in the third quarter, and annual 

 
MPC Statement January 29th 2014 Page 8 
 
8 
growth in 2013 is estimated to have been around 1,9 per cent. Although an 
improved outcome is forecast for 2014, growth is still expected to remain below 
estimated potential output of between 3,0 and 3,5 per cent. The Bank’s forecasts 
for growth in 2014 and 2015 have been revised to 2,8 per cent and 3,3 per cent 
respectively, down from 3,0 per cent and 3,4 per cent in the previous forecast 
round. The Bank’s composite leading business cycle indicator continues to trend 
sideways, and was marginally negative in November.  
 
The mining sector is expected to remain under pressure in the face of work 
stoppages in the major platinum mines, with the risk of these disruptions 
spreading to the gold mines. Mining output recovered somewhat in the fourth 
quarter of 2013 from the September lows, and the sector is expected to have 
made a positive contribution to fourth quarter growth. The manufacturing sector is 
also expected to have exhibited stronger growth in the final quarter, following the 
strike-induced contraction in the third quarter. However, the sector has yet to 
exhibit a meaningful response to the weaker exchange rate, and the Kagiso PMI 
declined to just below 50 index points in December, for the first time since April 
2013.  
 
The construction sector presents a mixed picture. The FNB/BER building 
confidence index remained unchanged at 48 index points in the fourth quarter of 
2013, the highest level in 5 years. However, the upward trend in the real value of 
building plans passed observed in the earlier part of 2013 has leveled off, and 

 
MPC Statement January 29th 2014 Page 9 
 
9 
there was a notable decline in November by 12,5 per cent on a month-to-month 
basis, and a 14,5 per cent decline on a year-on-year basis. The outlook for civil 
construction, by contrast, appears to be more favourable. 
 
These restrained developments in the real sector have contributed to the slow 
pace of employment creation in the economy, and continued job losses in the 
private sector remain a concern. According to the Quarterly Employment 
Statistics (QES) survey of Statistics South Africa, formal sector employment 
increased by 13,400 in the year to the third quarter of 2013, or by 0,2 per cent.  In 
the third quarter of 2013, employment losses were most pronounced in mining 
and construction. 
 
Growth in consumption expenditure by households moderated from 2,8 per cent 
in the second quarter to 2,3 per cent in the third quarter, and is expected to 
remain relatively constrained by disappointing employment growth and a modest 
rise in credit extension. Slow growth was particularly evident in the consumption 
of non-durable goods and services. Real expenditure on durable goods remained 
strong, with growth of 9,3 per cent. Nevertheless, domestic new vehicles sales 
appear to be under pressure, having contracted by 3,3 per cent on a quarter-to
quarter basis in the final quarter of 2013. Although retail trade sales increased by 
1,2 per cent on a month-to-month basis in November 2013, they increased only 
marginally, by 0,1 per cent, when the three months to November are compared to 
the previous three months. Consumer confidence, as reflected in the FNB/BER 

 
MPC Statement January 29th 2014 Page 10 
 
10 
consumer confidence index, remained at a low level of -7, a marginal 
improvement from the previous quarter. 
 
Growth in credit extension by the banking system to the private sector continued 
to lose momentum. Twelve-month growth in total loans and advances to the 
private sector moderated to 7,4 per cent in November, with credit extension to 
households measuring 5,9 per cent, compared with 10,4 per cent at the same 
time in 2012. Twelve-month growth in general loans to households, mainly 
unsecured lending, measured 8,1 per cent in November, the lowest rate of 
growth since April 2009, while annualised growth over three months showed a 
contraction of 0,8 per cent. Although there has been an increase in commercial 
mortgage credit extension, growth in outstanding residential mortgages remains 
subdued at 1,3 per cent. Instalment sale credit and leasing finance has continued 
to be relatively brisk, but could moderate if motor vehicle demand continues to 
decline. Household debt as a percentage of household disposable income 
declined slightly from 75,8 per cent in the second quarter to 75,5 per cent in the 
third quarter of 2013. 
 
Wage settlement rates, as measured by Andrew Levy Employment Publications, 
measured 7,9 per cent during 2013. However, according to QES data, growth in 
nominal remuneration per worker declined from 8,8 per cent in the year to the 
second quarter of 2013, to 6,6 per cent in the year to the third quarter. For the 
economy as a whole, despite a small decline in labour productivity growth, unit 

 
MPC Statement January 29th 2014 Page 11 
 
11 
labour cost growth declined over the year from 6,9 per cent in the second quarter 
to 4,9 per cent in the third quarter. However there are important sectoral 
differences. For instance, unit labour cost growth in the manufacturing sector 
accelerated from 5,6 per cent to 6,9 per cent during the same period, while 
nominal remuneration per worker in the mining sector increased by 9,0 per cent. 
 
Food prices have been the main contributor to the downside surprises in inflation 
in the past two months, with prices increasing by 3,5 per cent in December. 
Global food prices generally declined during the year amid improved wheat and 
maize harvests. The rand exchange rate, coupled with disappointing domestic 
harvests due to drought in some areas, has impacted adversely on the domestic 
maize and wheat prices in recent weeks, with the spot prices of maize increasing 
by about 12 per cent during January, following increases of around 20 per cent 
between August and December 2013. These pressures have not as yet been 
observed in the producer price index where cereal and other crop prices declined 
by one per cent over the year in November. Persistent drought conditions in a 
number of regions have resulted in the culling of cattle, leading to extremely low 
meat price inflation since September (0,1 per cent in December).  However, 
these favourable food price outcomes are not expected to persist as higher spot 
grain prices work through to consumer prices.  
 
Although the exchange rate pass-through has generally been relatively muted to 
date, the impact on the petrol price has been almost immediate. International oil 

 
MPC Statement January 29th 2014 Page 12 
 
12 
prices have been fairly stable, with Brent crude oil trading in a range of between 
US$106 and US$109 during January. In December and January the domestic 
petrol price was increased by a cumulative 55 cent per litre, and a further 
significant increase, in excess of 30 cents per litre, can be expected in February, 
primarily as a result of the weaker exchange rate. Sustained upside pressure 
from petrol prices on inflation can therefore be anticipated should the rand 
continue to depreciate. 
 
The MPC carefully considered the economic challenges facing South Africa and 
the appropriate policy response. On the one hand, inflation forecasts indicate the 
possibility of being out of the target range for an extended period, largely due to 
the impact of the depreciating currency. The risks to the inflation forecast are 
seen to be significantly on the upside.  Large adjustments to the exchange rate 
will inevitably impact on inflation, even in conditions of relatively low pass-through 
such as we have been experiencing. 
 On the other hand, the growth outlook remains of concern.  Credit extension is 
low and declining, few jobs on a net basis are being created, and gross fixed 
capital formation, particularly from the private sector, is significantly below what is 
required. 
Capital outflows and a current account deficit exacerbate the difficulties that lie 
ahead. Exchange rate pressures are expected to intensify as markets adjust to 
the new pattern of global capital flows. Although monetary policy in the advanced 

 
MPC Statement January 29th 2014 Page 13 
 
13 
economies remains accommodative, the process of normalisation has begun, 
and the spillovers have implications for our own monetary policy. 
The primary responsibility of the Bank is to keep inflation under control and 
ensure that inflation expectations remain well anchored. The depreciation 
experienced so far could improve our international competitiveness, provided that 
it is not eroded through higher wage and other input prices.  
In the light of these circumstances and taking account of policy trade-offs, the 
MPC has decided to increase the repurchase rate by 50 basis points to 5,5 per 
cent per annum as of 30 January 2014. The MPC is of the view that, 
notwithstanding this increase in the repo rate, monetary policy remains 
accommodative.  Further moves in the repo rate will be highly data dependent.  
We will continue to monitor developments closely and will not hesitate to act as 
required in keeping with our mandate. 
 
 