Since the previous meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), the near-term 
inflation outlook has deteriorated, but the longer-term outlook is more or less 
unchanged. The expected inflation profile has been negatively affected by higher 
international oil prices and a persistence in elevated food price inflation despite 
improved rainfall in many of the drought-stricken regions. At the same time, the rand 
has displayed some resilience. While some of the key risks to the rand appear to 
have subsided for now, they could re-emerge at any stage.  
Global growth prospects are mixed amid policy uncertainty, primarily in the US and 
the UK. The domestic growth outlook remains challenging, although a modest 
improvement is expected over the forecast period. 
The year-on-year inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) for all 
urban areas measured 6,8 per cent in December, up from 6,6 per cent in November. 
The December outcome surprised on the upside relative to the Bank’s forecast and 
the market consensus expectation of 6,5 per cent. The main sources of this surprise 
2 
 
included food prices, housing rentals, recreation and culture, and restaurants and 
hotels. Food price inflation remained elevated at 12,0 per cent in December, 
matching the recent high recorded in October 2016. The contribution of the category 
of food and non-alcoholic beverages to the overall inflation outcome has remained 
unchanged at 1,8 percentage points for the past 3 months. Goods price inflation 
measured 7,8 per cent in December, up from 7,7 per cent in November, while 
services price inflation increased from 5,6 per cent to 5,9 per cent. The Bank’s 
measure of core inflation, which excludes food, fuel and electricity measured 5,9 per 
cent, up from 5,7 per cent.  
Producer price inflation for final manufactured goods measured 6,9 per cent in 
November, compared with 6,6 per cent in October. The main contributor to the 
November outcome was the category of food products, beverages and tobacco 
products which contributed 3,9 percentage points. 
The inflation forecast of the Bank has deteriorated since the previous meeting of the 
MPC. Headline inflation is now expected to only return to within the target range 
during the final quarter of 2017, and to average 6,2 per cent for the year, compared 
with 5,8 per cent in the previous forecast. The forecast for 2018 is more or less 
unchanged at an average of 5,5 per cent. The peak of the forecast remains at 6,6 
per cent, which was recorded in the final quarter of 2016, and this level is now 
expected to persist in the first quarter of 2017. This deterioration is mainly due to 
changed assumptions regarding international oil prices, the domestic fuel prices and 
the outlook for food prices, which more than offset the more favourable exchange 
rate assumption. 
3 
 
By contrast, the forecast for core inflation is unchanged, averaging 5,5 per cent and 
5,2 per cent in 2017 and 2018 respectively.  
Inflation expectations as reflected in the survey conducted by the Bureau for 
Economic Research during the fourth quarter of 2016 showed average inflation 
expectations for 2017 declining from 6,0 per cent in the third quarter to 5,8  per cent. 
The same outcome is expected for 2018, as well as for 5-year inflation expectations. 
Despite the slight moderation, expectations remain more or less anchored at the 
upper end of the target range, but with a narrower divergence between the different 
groups of respondents than is usually the case. The expectations of these groups 
ranged from 5,6 per cent to 6,0 per cent for 2017, and from 5,4 per cent to 6,0 per 
cent for 2018. The outcome may have been distorted by the marked decline of 0,6 
percentage points for the trade union respondents. 
The median annual inflation expectations of market analysts as reflected in the 
Reuters Econometer survey  are relatively unchanged at 5,8 per cent and 5,5 per 
cent for 2017 and 2018. Bond market expectations implicit in the break-even inflation 
rates declined across all maturities since the previous meeting, though remain above 
the target range. 
The global economic outlook remains uncertain, despite increased optimism 
regarding US growth following the US presidential elections. There is still a great 
deal of uncertainty regarding the policies of the new administration, particularly with 
respect to the size of the promised fiscal stimulus. While some of the initial optimism 
has since been tempered somewhat, US growth is expected to be relatively strong, 
but with some downside risks posed by a stronger dollar. Uncertainty also persists 
regarding the prospects for the UK economy, as the terms of the disengagement 
4 
 
from the EU are unlikely to be resolved for some time. The steady but slow growth 
recovery in the Eurozone is expected to continue, but upcoming elections in a 
number of countries could pose risks to the outlook, alongside ongoing concerns 
about the prospects for the Italian economy. 
The outlook for emerging markets is also unclear, given conflicting developments. 
Commodity prices, especially industrial commodities, have risen in recent months, 
but protectionist threats from the US, if carried through, could undermine world trade 
and have an adverse effect on emerging markets in particular. These countries are 
also highly dependent on Chinese growth, which is expected to remain above the 6 
per cent level. However, given the credit-driven nature of recent Chinese growth, 
there are fears of an unsustainable credit bubble which could expose financial sector 
vulnerabilities, and undermine the growth outlook.  
There are tentative signs of global inflation edging up, as fears of deflation recede 
amid higher energy and food prices. As expected, the US Fed tightened monetary 
policy in December, and signalled further increases to come. However, the pace of 
increase is still expected to be relatively moderate amid a highly uncertain economic 
policy environment. Both the ECB and the Bank of Japan have maintained their 
highly accommodative policy stances. This divergence between the advanced 
economies is likely to persist for some time.  
The rand has displayed a degree of resilience since the previous meeting of the 
MPC, having traded in a relatively narrow range of between R14,22 and R13,46 
against the US dollar. Since the previous meeting, the rand has appreciated by 5,6 
per cent against the US dollar and by 4,2 per cent on a trade-weighted basis. The 
rand was positively impacted by the decisions of the ratings agencies not to 
5 
 
downgrade the sovereign foreign credit rating to sub-investment grade, although this 
remains a risk in the coming months. The limited response of the rand exchange rate 
to the increase in the US policy rate in mid-December suggests that the move had 
been largely priced in. A gradual pace of tightening is expected in the US, with the 
rand vulnerable to any upside surprises in this respect. 
The rand has been positively affected by the improvement in the terms of trade, 
following the recent modest increase in commodity prices. Although the overall 
current account deficit is expected to narrow over the forecast period, it remains 
relatively wide. In line with the recent improved capital flows to emerging economy 
bond markets, non-residents have been net buyers of South African bonds since the 
beginning of the year, while equity net sales have continued.  This follows persistent 
net sales of both bonds and equities during the last three months of 2016. 
The domestic growth outlook remains weak and more or less unchanged since the 
previous meeting of the MPC. The Bank expects growth to have averaged 0,4 per 
cent in 2016, although recent monthly data for the fourth quarter suggest that there 
may be a downside risk to this forecast. The forecast for 2017 has been revised 
down marginally to 1,1 per cent (from 1,2 per cent), and remains unchanged at 1,6 
per cent for 2018. This improved outlook relative to 2016 is consistent with the recent 
upward trend in the composite leading indicator of the Bank. By contrast, the 
RMB/BER Business Confidence Index declined again in the fourth quarter, following 
a recovery in the previous quarter. Much of this decline was driven by the new 
vehicle sector. 
 
6 
 
The recent monthly data paint a bleak picture for the fourth quarter of 2016. Mining 
production, which had improved in the second and third quarters, contracted in both 
October and November. However, improved commodity prices are expected to help 
the sector in the coming months. The manufacturing sector recorded low but positive 
growth in November, following a month-to-month decline in October. The Barclays 
Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) declined further in December, and recorded its 
fifth consecutive month below the neutral 50 level.  
The low level of business confidence is reflected in the continued, but slower, 
contraction in real gross fixed capital formation. Gross fixed investment has 
contracted for four consecutive quarters, and has been particularly marked in the 
private sector. This has contributed to the persistent labour market weakness, with 
formal non-agricultural employment (excluding temporary election-related 
employment) remaining unchanged in the year to the third quarter of 2016. The 
official unemployment rate increased to 27,1 per cent, its highest level since the 
inception of the Quarterly Labour Force Survey in 2008. 
Wage growth appears to be responding to the weak labour market environment. 
Year-on-year nominal wage growth per worker moderated for a fifth consecutive 
quarter in the third quarter of 2016, down to 5,8 per cent. Following a small decline in 
labour productivity growth, nominal unit labour costs in the formal non-agricultural 
sector increased to 5,7 per cent.  The slower nominal wage growth per worker is 
consistent with the lower wage settlement rates reported by Andrew Levy 
Employment Publications. 
Household consumption expenditure data paint a mixed picture. Growth in 
household consumption expenditure accelerated to 2,6 per cent in the third quarter 
7 
 
despite a further contraction in durable goods consumption. Real retail trade sales 
declined in October, but increased markedly in November on a month-to-month 
basis. By contrast wholesale trade sales contracted in both months. Domestic new 
vehicle sales remained subdued following further declines in the final quarter of last 
year.  
Notwithstanding some improvement, consumers remain under pressure and 
consumer confidence remains low, as indicated in the sharp contraction in the 
FNB/BER Consumer Confidence Index in the fourth quarter. Households remain 
highly indebted despite a further moderation in the debt ratio, and the subdued 
housing and equity markets have contributed to an absence of strong wealth effects. 
Slower wage growth along with stagnant employment growth and expected tax 
increases in the forthcoming budget are also likely to dampen consumption 
expenditure. 
A further constraint to consumption expenditure growth has been the weak credit 
extension to the private sector, which, at 4,5 per cent in November, was the lowest 
year-on-year growth since late 2010. While growth in credit extension to the 
household sector was particularly subdued, that to the corporate sector also 
moderated in the second half of 2016. The strongest decline was seen in mortgage 
credit extension for commercial property.  
Food price inflation is expected to decline following good rainfall in parts of the 
country. Spot prices for both maize and wheat have declined significantly, and a 
markedly higher maize crop is expected this year. However, the impact on prices at 
the consumer level are yet to be felt, with meat prices likely to lag other food price 
categories as farmers restock their herds. Although the Bank’s inflation forecast 
8 
 
assumes that food price inflation has more or less peaked, the pace of moderation is 
expected to be slower than in the previous forecast. Food price inflation is now 
expected to average 7,0 per cent during 2017, compared with 6,5 per cent 
previously. Food price disinflation is expected to be constrained or delayed by higher 
fuel costs and a rising trend in global food prices. 
Brent crude oil prices increased by over 20 per cent to almost US$60 per barrel in 
response to the OPEC-brokered agreement to restrict production. Prices have since 
moderated to current levels of around US$55 per barrel. The sustainability of this 
agreement and its longer-term impact on prices is uncertain, given the possibility of 
offsetting developments. A number of oil producers were exempt from the 
agreement; there are incentives and scope for cartel members to exceed their 
quotas; and US shale producers have already increased production in response to 
higher prices. These factors are likely to constrain oil price increases. While the 
Bank’s oil price assumption has been revised up, the trajectory is relatively flat. 
Despite the stronger rand exchange rate, the domestic price of 93 octane petrol 
increased by 50 cents per litre in January, and a further increase can be expected in 
February.  
The MPC has noted the marked deterioration in the inflation forecast since the 
previous meeting, as well as the extension of the expected breach of the upper level 
of the target range by a further two quarters. Inflation is now expected to return to 
within the target range in the final quarter of 2017. While this is a cause for concern, 
the main drivers of this deterioration are supply side shocks, in particular oil and food 
prices. The increase in the international oil price is not expected to be a start of a 
new oil price spiral. Various supply side factors are expected to constrain oil prices 
9 
 
going forward in the absence of any major global political risks that would threaten 
production. While the food price forecast has been adversely affected by higher input 
costs, a steady decline in food price inflation is still expected.   
The more favourable rand exchange rate has been an important factor in offsetting 
some of the negative impacts of these developments. Despite a turbulent second 
half of 2016, both domestically and globally, the rand has been relatively resilient. 
Furthermore, the current level of the rand is stronger than that implicit in the forecast, 
and pass-through to inflation continues to be relatively muted. Nevertheless it 
remains vulnerable to both domestic and external shocks.  
As always, the approach of the Committee is to look through the first-round effects of 
exogenous shocks, but remain focused on the possible emergence of second-round 
effects which could require a policy response. At this stage, the longer-term 
trajectory over the relevant policy horizon is unchanged, as is the forecast for core 
inflation. In particular, the MPC will take note of possible changes in the longer-term 
inflation expectations, which had shown tentative signs of moderation in the fourth 
quarter of 2016. The MPC assesses the risks to the inflation outlook to be 
moderately on the upside.  
The domestic growth outlook has remained largely unchanged despite a possible 
weaker outcome in the fourth quarter of 2016. While some improvement is 
anticipated over the forecast period, growth is expected to remain below potential. 
The risks to the growth forecast are assessed to be broadly balanced. Growth 
prospects remain dependent on uncertain but tentatively improving global conditions, 
and their impact on commodity prices. Domestically, some improvement in 
agricultural production can be expected. However, a significant improvement in 
10 
 
growth prospects requires the implementation of structural reforms which could 
contribute to increased business and consumer confidence.  
In light of these developments and the assessment of the balance of risks, the MPC 
has unanimously decided to keep the repurchase rate unchanged at 7,0 per cent per 
annum.  
The MPC remains focused on the medium- to longer-term inflation outlook, but the 
deterioration of the shorter-term outlook requires increased vigilance. Furthermore, 
the MPC remains concerned that the longer-term inflation trajectory continues to be 
uncomfortably close to the upper end of the target range. The Committee retains the 
view that we may be near the end of the hiking cycle.  However, should second
round effects emerge that undermine the longer-term inflation outlook, there may be 
a reassessment of this view. 