In recent weeks, some of the risks to the inflation outlook have dissipated somewhat. 
The rand appreciated following the African National Congress (ANC) elective 
conference. Also, Eskom was granted a lower-than-expected tariff increase. While 
S&P Global Ratings downgraded South Africa’s long-term local currency sovereign 
credit rating to sub-investment grade, Moody’s Investors Service (Moody’s) placed 
the country ratings on review for a downgrade. A further downgrade therefore 
remains a risk, and will depend on government’s response to the deteriorating fiscal 
position and commitment to credible growth-enhancing policies.  
Against this more positive backdrop, the inflation forecast has improved despite 
continued increases in international oil prices. Near-term inflation is expected to 
remain close to the midpoint of the target range. At the same time, domestic growth 
outcomes have surprised on the upside, in large part due to the recovery in the 
MPC statement 18 January 2018 Page 2 
 
agricultural sector. While there have been moderate upward revisions to the growth 
forecast, the outlook remains challenging. 
The year-on-year inflation rate, as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) for 
all urban areas, measured 4.6% in November, down from 4.8% previously. Lower 
food and fuel price inflation contributed to this decline. Goods price inflation 
moderated to 3.7% from 4.1% previously, while services price inflation was 
unchanged at 5.5%. The South African Reserve Bank’s (SARB) measure of core 
inflation – which excludes food, fuel, and electricity – amounted to 4.4% in October 
compared with 4.5% previously.  
Year-on-year producer price inflation for final manufactured goods measured 5.1% in 
November, up from 5.0% in October. Food products price inflation moderated further 
to 0.9% due to strong base effects from lower agricultural prices. Meat price inflation, 
however, remains elevated, as the adverse effects of the recent drought continue to 
be felt. 
The inflation forecast generated by the SARB’s Quarterly Projection Model (QPM) 
shows some improvement since November. The average forecast for 2017 is 
unchanged at 5.3% but has been revised downwards for 2018 and 2019 to 4.9% and 
5.4% respectively from 5.2% and 5.5% previously. Inflation is expected to average 
5.5% in the final quarter of 2019. The lower turning point of the forecast is still 
expected in the first quarter of 2018 but has been revised down from 4.7% to 4.4%.  
The main drivers of the more favourable forecast were the stronger exchange rate 
and lower electricity price assumption, following the 5.23% electricity tariff increase 
granted to Eskom by the National Energy Regulator of South Africa (Nersa). This 
adjustment takes effect from July, when a 6.0% increase is assumed in the CPI 
MPC statement 18 January 2018 Page 3 
 
compared with 8.0% previously. The assumption from mid-2019 remains unchanged 
at 8.0%. These effects are countered to some extent by upward adjustments to the 
international oil price assumptions, as well as by the impact of the sugar tax on food 
prices. This tax is expected to increase food price inflation and headline inflation by 
0.6 and 0.1 percentage points respectively in the year following its expected 
implementation in April. Food price inflation is now expected to average 5.2% and 
6.0% in 2018 and 2019 respectively, up from 4.5% and 5.9% previously.  
The core inflation forecast remains unchanged at 4.8% for 2017 but has been 
adjusted down to 4.6% and 5.1% in 2018 and 2019 from 5.1% and 
5.3% respectively. Whereas previously a lower turning point of 4.6% was expected in 
the final two quarters of 2017, a low of 4.4% is now expected in the first quarter of 
2018.  
The improved forecast for core inflation is driven mainly by the stronger exchange 
rate, which is expected to impact favourably on core goods inflation. Higher wage 
pressures, by contrast, are expected to keep core services inflation more or less 
unchanged. The closing output gap also reduces the degree of downside pressure 
on inflation.  
Average inflation expectations for 2018, as reflected in the survey conducted by the 
Bureau for Economic Research (BER) in the fourth quarter of 2017, declined 
marginally from 5.8% to 5.7% but remain close to the upper end of the target range. 
Average expectations for 2019 were unchanged at 5.9%, as were the average five
year inflation expectations at 5.6%. These moderate moves mask larger adjustments 
compared with the third-quarter survey, with business people revising their 
MPC statement 18 January 2018 Page 4 
 
expectations higher over the two years, offsetting the downward adjustment by trade 
union officials. 
The expectations of market analysts, which are reflected in the Reuters econometer 
survey conducted in January, also show a slight improvement since November. The 
median forecasts for 2018 and 2019 have declined by 0.1 percentage points to 
5.1% and 5.4% respectively while the forecast for 2020 is 5.5%. Inflation 
expectations implicit in the inflation-linked bond yields have declined, with the five
year break-even inflation rates declining to 5.4%. 
The global growth outlook remains positive and relatively synchronised, although 
uneven across regions. However, some moderation in growth is generally expected 
in 2019. Growth in the United States (US) is expected to be given a boost by the 
proposed tax reforms, but the extent of this is still unclear. The euro area recovery 
also appears to be sustained, with a persistent decline in the unemployment rate 
amid a broad-based firming of fixed capital formation. The recent positive momentum 
in Japanese growth is also expected to continue. 
These favourable conditions are expected to have a positive spillover effect on 
emerging markets in general, with upward growth revisions in most regions, although 
less so for Latin America and Africa. Commodity exporters are also expected to 
benefit from the recovery in commodity prices. Consensus forecasts suggest that 
growth in China will be sustained at current levels despite continued financial stability 
risks. 
Global inflation trends, by contrast, remain subdued, although there are indications 
of emerging upside pressures, driven in part by higher energy prices. Core inflation 
pressures are also becoming evident in the US in particular, and are expected to 
MPC statement 18 January 2018 Page 5 
 
intensify gradually should strong growth and labour market tightness persist. 
Monetary policies in the advanced economies, particularly in the US and the United 
Kingdom (UK), are expected to maintain a moderate tightening bias, while the pace 
of withdrawal of monetary accommodation in the euro area and Japan is expected to 
be slow. These trends should help sustain capital flows to emerging markets. 
The rand exchange rate responded strongly to the outcome of the ANC elective 
conference, and since then has traded in a range of between R12.25 and 
R12.50 against the US dollar. This is in sharp contrast to the low of R14.47 a month 
earlier. Since the previous meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), the 
rand has appreciated by 13.1% against the US dollar, by 9.6% against the euro, and 
by 10.6% on a trade-weighted basis. 
In the near term, the rand is expected to remain sensitive to sentiment generated by 
political developments. The favourable outlook for capital flows to emerging markets 
as well as the positive trade account balances are expected to be supportive of the 
rand. The latter is a reflection of the favourable terms of trade and import 
compression from lower growth. However, the lingering prospect of a credit ratings 
downgrade to sub-investment grade by Moody’s continues to weigh on the longer
term outlook for the rand. Such an event would trigger the exclusion of South African 
government bonds from the World Government Bond Index, and is likely to 
precipitate significant capital outflows. The extent of the impact on the exchange rate 
remains uncertain.   
Domestic growth prospects appear to be showing some signs of improvement, 
although off a low base. This follows encouraging growth rates in the second and 
third quarters of this year, driven to a significant degree by the exceptionally strong 
MPC statement 18 January 2018 Page 6 
 
recovery in the agricultural sector. The SARB has revised its forecast for gross 
domestic product (GDP) growth up from 0.7% to 0.9% for 2017, while forecasts for 
2018 and 2019 have been adjusted to 1.4% and 1.6% respectively, up from 
1.2% and 1.5% previously. This more favourable outlook is consistent with the 
further increase in the SARB’s composite leading business cycle indicator of 
economic activity in October. The outlook is also likely to be impacted positively 
should the recent political developments lead to a sustained boost in business and 
consumer confidence.  
High-frequency data suggest that fourth-quarter growth is likely to be slower than in 
the previous quarter, but still positive. On a month-to-month basis, mining output 
increased in October but declined in November, while manufacturing output 
increased in both these months. However, the decline in the Absa Purchasing 
Managers’ Index (PMI) to 44.9 index points in December is indicative of the 
continued challenges faced by the sector. More positively, the sub-index measuring 
expected business conditions in six months’ time improved markedly. 
Despite the continued weakness in the Rand Merchant Bank (RMB) / BER business 
confidence index, growth in real gross fixed capital formation improved in the third 
quarter, following a contraction in the previous quarter. All three sectors recorded 
growth rates in excess of 4%. The recovery was most pronounced in the private 
sector. The durability of this improvement will be highly dependent on the extent to 
which the recent political developments impact on confidence and lead to greater 
policy certainty and credibility. This process could take some time. At this stage, the 
forecast is for minimal growth in gross fixed capital formation this year, with a slight 
improvement in 2019.  
MPC statement 18 January 2018 Page 7 
 
A prolonged recovery in fixed capital formation is needed to make inroads into the 
official unemployment rate of 27.7%. The Quarterly Employment Statistics survey of 
Statistics South Africa shows that, during the third quarter of 2017, formal non
agricultural employment in both the public and the private sectors declined further. 
Adjusted for election-related employment by the Electoral Commission of South 
Africa (IEC), private-sector employment creation more or less offset public-sector 
losses in the four quarters to the third quarter of 2017. 
Growth in real final consumption expenditure by households decelerated to an 
annualised rate of 2.6% in the third quarter but was characterised by a sharp 
increase of 19.9% in expenditure on durable goods, mainly motor vehicles. Some 
moderation in consumption expenditure growth is expected in the fourth quarter 
following weaker motor vehicle sales. However, the strong ‘Black Friday’ effect 
evident in the November retail trade sales may moderate the extent of this 
slowdown.  
Despite being relatively constrained, the outlook for household consumption 
expenditure has improved, with annual average real growth rates of around 
1.3% expected over the forecast period. This category is expected to be the main 
driver of GDP growth in the short to medium term. Although consumers are likely to 
be adversely affected by possible further tax increases, expenditure is expected to 
be underpinned by lower inflation and positive real wage increases. 
Growth in bank credit extension to households remains weak but has trended slightly 
higher in recent months. Much of this increase reflects growth in instalment sale 
financing, consistent with improved motor vehicle sales. Growth in credit extension to 
MPC statement 18 January 2018 Page 8 
 
the corporate sector, while more robust, has been on a downward trend for some 
time. 
Wage pressures are expected to continue contributing to inflation persistence. 
Growth over four quarters in nominal remuneration per worker in the formal non
agricultural sector increased from 6.3% in the second quarter of 2017 to 6.8% in the 
third quarter. However, adjusting for labour productivity, growth in nominal unit 
labour costs declined from 6.1% to 5.5%. Average nominal remuneration increases 
are expected to remain above 6% over the forecast period. 
International oil prices have continued their upward trend to current levels of around 
US$70 per barrel for Brent crude oil. These increases are due to supply restrictions 
by some producers, as well as increased global demand. At this stage, it is unclear if 
these prices will settle at these elevated levels or if the trend will be reversed by 
increased US shale output in response to higher prices. The oil price assumptions in 
the QPM have been adjusted upwards to average US$62 per barrel in 2018 and 
2019. Domestic petrol prices increased by 71 cents per litre in December but were 
reduced by 34 cents per litre (for 95 octane) in January as a result of the stronger 
exchange rate. The current over-recovery on the petrol price points to a further price 
reduction in February, should current trends persist.  
The MPC has taken note of the improved inflation outlook over the near term in 
particular. Inflation is expected to reach a low point below the midpoint of the target 
range, but is then expected to resume an upward trajectory and measure 5.5% in the 
final quarter of next year. This remains above the midpoint of the target range. The 
risks to the forecast are still assessed to be on the upside, though the degree of the 
upside risk has subsided.  
MPC statement 18 January 2018 Page 9 
 
Two main risks featured prominently in the MPC discussions. First is the prospect of 
a sovereign credit ratings downgrade, which would result in three major agencies 
rating South Africa’s local-currency debt as sub-investment grade. The impact on the 
rand and on long-bond yields could be significant, but the extent to which a universal 
downgrade is already priced in remains unclear. Furthermore, the assumption in the 
forecast for the starting point of the rand (at R12.90 against the US dollar) is weaker 
than current levels.   
The response of government to the intensifying fiscal challenges in the upcoming 
budget will be key to avoiding this event risk. In addition, the pressures are now even 
more intense, with several state-owned enterprises facing financial risks. The 
challenge for government will be to find ways to finance the deficit in a growth
positive manner, and at the same time convey a credible commitment to structural 
reforms that can raise the potential growth of the economy. This would also support 
business and consumer confidence. 
The second risk relates to international oil price developments. Although the 
assumptions have been raised over the forecast period, the MPC still assesses the 
risks to be moderately on the upside, and further upward adjustment may be 
required in the future.  
Demand pressures are benign, with core inflation pressures relatively contained.  
While household consumption expenditure is expected to be supported by positive 
wage growth, it remains constrained. The economic growth outlook is also more 
positive, but fragile. At this stage, the MPC assesses the risks to the growth forecast 
to be more or less balanced.  
MPC statement 18 January 2018 Page 10 
 
The endogenous interest rate path generated by the QPM has changed slightly since 
the previous meeting. Whereas three increases of 25 basis points by the end of 2019 
were indicated previously, the third increase is now a marginal call. Furthermore, the 
timing of the first increase has been pushed out to later in the period. The implied 
path remains a broad policy guide and could change in either direction by the next 
meeting in response to new developments and changing risks.  
In light of the recent developments and the balance of risks, the MPC has decided 
that it would be appropriate to maintain the current monetary policy stance at this 
stage. Accordingly, the repurchase rate remains unchanged at 6.75% per annum. 
Five members preferred an unchanged stance, while one member preferred a 
25 basis point reduction. 
 