The period since the previous meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) 
has been dominated by the reaction of the global financial markets to statements 
by the US Federal Reserve that a slowdown in quantitative easing may begin 
sooner than previously anticipated. The news impacted on capital flows to 
emerging markets, with outflows from bond markets in particular, but yields on 
long term bonds of advanced economies were also affected. While some of the 
initial fears have been addressed by further guidance from the Fed, this episode 
gives some insight into the difficulties that could be faced in fine-tuning exit 
strategies from highly accommodative monetary policies, particularly at a time 
when global growth remains weak. 
 
 2 
These events had a significant impact on the exchange rate of the rand, creating 
further upside risks to the inflation outlook at a time when the domestic economy 
has shown increased signs of vulnerability. There has consequently been no let
up in the policy dilemma faced by monetary policy: that of a widening output gap 
in a worsening inflation environment. 
 
The year-on-year inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) 
for all urban areas surprised on the downside at 5,6 per cent in May 2013, having 
measured 5,9 per cent for the previous three consecutive months. However, this 
decline is likely to have been temporary as it was due in part to a 73 cent per litre 
decrease in the petrol price in May, which has since been reversed by an 84 cent 
per litre increase in July. Food price inflation increased further from 6,3 per cent 
in April to 6,7 per cent, and accounted for 1,0 percentage point of CPI inflation. 
The other main contributors to the inflation outcome were housing and utilities 
and miscellaneous goods and services which contributed 1,4 and 1,1 percentage 
points respectively. Administered price inflation declined to 6,3 percent from 8,9 
per cent in April due to the petrol price decline. Excluding petrol, administered 
price inflation was unchanged at 7,8 per cent. Core inflation, which excludes 
food, petrol and electricity, measured 5,3 per cent, marginally up from 5,2 per 
cent in April. The headline producer price inflation for final manufactured goods 
measured 4,9 per cent in May, compared with 5,4 per cent in April.  
  
 3 
Despite the lower starting point, the inflation forecast of the Bank has 
deteriorated since the previous meeting of the MPC. Inflation is now expected to 
average 0,1 and 0,3 percentage points higher in 2013 and 2014 at 5,9 per cent 
and 5,5 per cent respectively, while the forecast for 2015 has been raised from 
5,0 per cent to 5,2 per cent. A temporary breach of the upper end of the target 
range is still expected in the third quarter of 2013, but at a higher average level of 
6,3 per cent (6,1 per cent previously), followed by a return to within the target 
range by the final quarter of the year. The deterioration is mainly due to 
continued currency weakness and higher-than-expected petrol price increases. 
 
The forecast for core inflation for 2013 is unchanged at an average of 5,3 per 
cent in 2013 and is now expected to peak at 5,5 per cent in the fourth quarter. 
This measure is then expected to moderate and to average 5,2 per cent and 5,0 
per cent in the coming two years, compared with the previous forecasts of 5,0 per 
cent and 4,6 per cent respectively. This upward drift in the forecast in the 
absence of obvious excess demand pressures suggests that there may be 
emerging underlying pressures, possibly due to the lagged effects of the 
depreciation of the rand exchange rate.  
 
Inflation expectations appear to have remained anchored around the upper end 
of the inflation target range. According to the survey conducted by the Bureau for 
Economic Research at Stellenbosch University during the second quarter of 
2013, inflation expectations of all the categories of respondents remained almost 
 4 
unchanged compared with those of the previous quarter. Overall, the survey 
found that inflation is expected to average 6,0 per cent in 2013 and 6,1 per cent 
in the next two years, with financial analysts’ expectations below those of the 
business executives and trade union officials over the whole forecast period and 
within the target range. The former category is consistent with the Reuters survey 
which reflects expectations of an average of 5,9 per cent in 2013, and 
moderating to 5,6 per cent and 5,4 per cent in the following two years, 
respectively.  
 
The global economic growth outlook has remained fragile due to the continuing 
deeper recession in the Eurozone and a slowdown in a number of systemically 
important emerging market economies. Several forecasters, including the IMF, 
have downgraded Eurozone growth forecasts against the backdrop of a 
slowdown in Germany, and continued risks emanating from Portugal, Italy and 
Spain. In its recent World Economic Outlook update, the IMF reduced its 2013 
forecast for Eurozone growth by 0,2 percentage points to -0,6 per cent, with a 
weaker recovery than previously forecast in 2014. Although the US economic 
recovery appears to be gaining some traction, headwinds from the fiscal 
contraction remain, and first quarter economic growth, at an annualised 1,8 per 
cent, was weaker than the initial estimate of 2,5 per cent. The sustainability of the 
recovery is also at risk from rising long-term bond and mortgage interest rates in 
response to expectations of a tapering off of asset purchases by the Fed. There 
 5 
are tentative signs of stronger growth in Japan, but the sustainability of the 
recovery remains uncertain. 
 
The slowing growth in various emerging market economies including China, 
Brazil and Russia illustrate the difficulties of decoupling from the advanced 
economies, with the IMF revising its forecasts for 2013 for China from 7,8 per 
cent to 7,5 per cent; Russia from 3,4 per cent to 2,5 per cent; and Brazil from 3,0 
per cent to 2,5 per cent.  The deteriorating outlook for emerging markets has 
been compounded by the recent capital flow reversals that impacted adversely 
on domestic bond and currency markets in particular. While financial markets 
have stabilised somewhat, the risks posed to emerging economies in general, 
including South Africa, by normalisation of monetary policy in the US in the 
future, are evident. 
 
The combination of slower growth in China and the stronger US dollar has also 
impacted negatively on commodity prices, although oil prices have been 
underpinned by risks related to recent events in Egypt. Global inflation remains 
benign and monetary policy is expected to remain accommodative in the 
advanced economies for some time, as indicated in the forward guidance 
provided by the ECB, the Bank of England and the Fed, notwithstanding a 
possible slower pace of quantitative easing in the US. By contrast, a general 
tightening bias is evident in a number of emerging markets in response to recent 
capital flow and exchange rate developments. 
 6 
 
Movements in the exchange rate of the rand continue to pose the main upside 
risk to the inflation outlook. Since the previous meeting of the MPC exchange 
rate volatility has increased and the rand generally traded in a range between 
R9,60 and R10,36 against the US dollar. Since the beginning of the year the rand 
has depreciated by 14,2 per cent against the US dollar and by 11,1 per cent on a 
trade weighted basis. Much of the recent volatility and weakness has been in line 
with the reaction of a number of other emerging market currencies to fears of US 
monetary policy tightening. The rand has also been negatively impacted by lower 
commodity prices. 
 
Domestic bond yields increased significantly in response to capital outflows and 
higher bond yields in the advanced economies. The yield on the 10-year 
government bond, for example, increased by more than 100 basis points since 
the financial market turbulence in late May. Net sales of domestic government 
bonds by non-residents amounted to R17,4 bn in May and June. In July non
residents became net buyers again with net purchases of R3,0 bn, bringing the 
year-to-date net total to R5,2 bn. Having been net sellers of South African 
equities in both 2011 and 2012, non-residents have returned to the market, with 
year-to-date net purchases of R23,3 bn. 
 
Despite a 15,5 per cent nominal effective depreciation of the rand exchange rate 
since January 2012, the pass-through to inflation has been relatively muted, 
 7 
particularly when compared with previous episodes of currency weakness. This is 
probably a reflection of the weak pricing power in some sectors of the economy 
in a low growth environment. Nevertheless the risk remains that these pricing 
pressures may intensify at some stage, particularly if the exchange rate 
depreciates further from current levels.  
 
Market expectations are for a moderate appreciation of the rand in the coming 
months, although these expectations have been tempered in recent surveys. 
According to the Reuters Econometer survey conducted in June, analysts on 
average expect a rand/dollar exchange rate of R9,70 at the end of 2013, and 
R9,40 at the end of 2014. There is, however, a wide dispersion between the 
forecasters, reflecting a high degree of uncertainty. Despite a slight narrowing of 
the current account deficit in the first quarter of 2013 to 5,8 per cent of GDP, the 
depreciated currency reflects this deficit against a backdrop of declining terms of 
trade and more uncertain global capital flows. 
 
The outlook for domestic economic growth has weakened further, following the 
first quarter annualised growth rate of 0,9 per cent. While more favourable 
outcomes can be expected in the subsequent quarters of this year, overall annual 
growth is likely to be lower than the 2,5 per cent growth rate recorded in 2012. 
The Bank’s growth forecast for 2013 has again been revised down from 2,4 per 
cent to 2,0 per cent, and from 3,5 per cent to 3,3 per cent for 2014. Growth is 
expected to accelerate to 3,6 per cent in 2015, compared with 3,8 per cent 
 8 
previously. The risks to the outlook are still assessed to be on the downside, 
particularly in the face of further delays in overcoming electricity supply 
constraints. In line with these subdued growth prospects, the RMB/BER Business 
Confidence Index declined from 52 in the first quarter of 2013 to 48 in the second 
quarter, consistent with the continued sideways movement of the Bank’s leading 
indicator of economic activity.  
 
The outlook for the mining sector remains bleak following a 0,7 per cent year-on
year contraction in May. Although production showed positive month-to-month 
growth for the first time in four months, on a three-month-to-three-month basis 
the sector contracted by 1,4 per cent. There are indications that the 
manufacturing sector will make a positive contribution to growth in the second 
quarter following the annualised 7,9 per cent contraction in the first quarter. In 
May the sector expanded by 2,2 per cent on a year-on-year basis, and by 0,9 per 
cent on a three-month-to-three-month basis. This more positive trend is also 
indicated in the Kagiso PMI which increased by 1,2 index points to 52,6 in July, 
 
The real value of building plans passed remains on a moderately upward trend 
despite a decline in May. The FNB construction confidence index reflects some 
improvement, having increased by 4 points to 41 in the second quarter of 2013, 
although the civil construction index declined somewhat over the same period. 
 
 9 
Underlying the sluggish economic growth outlook is the low growth in real gross 
fixed capital formation, which moderated from an annualised 4,3 per cent in the 
fourth quarter of 2012 to 2,5 per cent in the first quarter of 2013. Private sector 
fixed investment growth slowed from 3,8 per cent to 2,8 per cent over this period, 
and reflected lower outlays in all sectors apart from agriculture, construction and 
finance. Work stoppages at Eskom’s Medupi plant also impacted negatively on 
investment by state-owned enterprises in the quarter. Fixed investment 
expenditure is likely to remain affected by low business confidence and 
prolonged electricity supply constraints. 
 
Employment growth remains subdued, particularly in the private sector. In the 
year from March 2012 to March 2013, employment grew by 1,0 per cent, or 
80,000 workers, of which 65,000 were in the public sector, although this number 
was inflated by temporary appointments relating to municipal by-elections in the 
first quarter of the year. Employment contracted in the mining and manufacturing 
sectors during this period. The official unemployment rate increased from 24,9 
per cent in the fourth quarter of 2012 to 25,2 per cent in the first quarter of 2013. 
Of particular concern is the increase in the youth unemployment rate to 52,9 per 
cent in the first quarter. 
 
Slower growth in real consumption expenditure by households is indicative of 
declining consumer confidence and the relative lack of excessive demand 
pressures in the economy. Household Consumption expenditure growth 
 10 
moderated to 2,3 per cent in the first quarter of 2013, driven mainly by more 
subdued demand for durable goods, particularly motor vehicles. Real retail trade 
sales surprised on the upside in May with year-on-year growth of 6,2 per cent. 
Nevertheless, retail trade sales increased by 0,5 per cent in the three months 
ending May compared with the previous three months, suggesting a continuation 
of the moderate growth in sales.  
  
Consumption expenditure is expected to be constrained by high petrol and 
electricity costs, high consumer debt levels and declining growth in credit 
extension to households. Despite a moderation in the growth of household debt 
in the first quarter of 2013, the ratio of household debt to disposable income was 
unchanged at 75,4 per cent, as growth in real disposable income also slowed. 
  
Twelve-month growth in total loans and advances extended to the private sector 
increased by 9,3 per cent in May, but excluding mortgage advances the increase 
was 16,8 per cent. In the first five months of 2013, general loans (mainly 
unsecured lending) continued to account for the bulk of the increase in credit 
extension, but at a slower pace, particularly to households. Twelve-month growth 
in general loans to households declined from a recent peak of 35,4 per cent in 
September 2012 to 24,4 per cent in May 2013. The slowdown is more 
pronounced when measured over three months. In the three months to the end of 
May 2013, annualised growth was 11,3 per cent, compared with rates of increase 
in excess of 30 per cent during 2012. 
 11 
 
One of the upside risks to inflation remains wage and salary increases. In the first 
quarter of 2013, a stronger upward trend was observed with growth in nominal 
remuneration per worker increasing from 6,6 per cent in the fourth quarter of 
2012 to 7,5 per cent. With slower productivity growth, this implied an increase in 
unit labour cost growth from 5,2 per cent to 6,7 per cent. These increases are 
consistent with the overall average wage settlement rate in collective bargaining 
agreements published by Andrew Levy Employment Publications, which 
increased from 7,6 per cent in 2012 to 7,9 per cent in the first quarter of 2013.   
 
Other upside risks to the inflation outlook emanate from food prices, which have 
been accelerating over the past few months following a low of 4,6 per cent in 
September 2012. Food price pressures are intensifying at the producer price 
level, with manufactured food product prices increasing by 6,9 per cent in May. 
Although agricultural product inflation remained subdued at 2,6 per cent, this was 
mainly due to the 13,0 per cent decline in live animal prices which offset the 10,4 
per cent increase in cereal and other crop prices. More favourably, global food 
prices have declined as a result of expectations of bumper crops in some of the 
main grain producing countries. The FAO international cereals price index 
decreased by 10,1 per cent since September 2012.   
 
Global oil prices have broken out of their recent trading range of between 
US$100 and US$105, mainly due to political developments in the Middle East. 
 12 
However, the relatively subdued global growth outlook, particularly in China, is 
likely to restrain these price increases. The current under-recovery of around 36 
cents per litre on the domestic petrol price is mainly due to international price 
developments, and indicates that a further petrol price increase can be expected 
in August.  
 
The MPC continues to face conflicting policy choices relating to rising inflation 
and slowing growth. Inflation is expected to resume its upward trajectory 
following the brief respite in May.  However, despite the upward trend in core 
inflation, there are no strong signs of excess demand pressures and the forecast 
for headline inflation suggests that the breach of the target may be short-lived. 
The main upside risk to the inflation outlook is the exchange rate and much will 
depend on the strength of the pass-through to inflation, which to date has been 
relatively muted. However, the risk remains that these pressures could be 
mounting, particularly if further currency weakness occurs and affects inflation 
expectations, which are currently anchored at the upper end of the target range.  
In addition, the outcome of the present round of wage bargaining will be critical in 
determining the extent of wage pressure on the inflation outlook. 
 
The output gap has widened, and is only anticipated to begin to narrow during 
2015, when growth is expected to be more or less in line with potential. The 
downside risk to growth has already resulted in the Bank being more tolerant of 
 13 
inflation at the upper end of the target range than would normally have been the 
case, an approach that is consistent with a flexible inflation targeting framework.  
 
While the upside risks to the inflation outlook reduce the scope for further 
accommodation, a tightening of the monetary policy stance does not 
automatically follow. This will be highly dependent on how we see the inflation 
trajectory unfolding in this very uncertain environment. In other words, it has 
become even more data dependent.  At this stage a sustained breach of the 
inflation target is not our central forecast. However, we are concerned about the 
revised higher trajectory of core inflation and macroeconomic vulnerabilities that 
are increasingly evident.  The MPC is mindful of these conflicting pressures and 
the challenging domestic and global environment, and will continue to monitor 
developments closely and act appropriately to achieve its mandate. The MPC 
has decided to keep the repurchase rate unchanged at 5,0 per cent per annum. 