Since the previous meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee the global 
environment has been dominated by heightened uncertainty relating to the debt 
crisis in Greece and the sharp decline in equity prices in China. While the tail risks 
from these events appear to have dissipated somewhat, uncertainties still remain. At 
the same time, the risks associated with financial market volatility related to the 
timing of the first increase in the US policy rate persist. Domestically, the growth 
outlook remains weak, as both the supply and demand sides remain constrained 
amid declining business and consumer confidence. The inflation forecast has 
deteriorated slightly since the previous meeting, notwithstanding the lower-than
expected outcome in June. Headline inflation is expected to breach the upper end of 
the target range during the first two quarters of next year, while upside risks posed 
by the exchange rate have increased. 
 
The year-on-year inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) for all 
urban areas measured 4,6 per cent and 4,7 per cent in May and June respectively. 
2 
 
The latter surprised on the downside, due inter alia to lower than expected increases 
in food price and rental inflation, with upside pressures coming from higher petrol 
prices. The categories of housing and utilities, food and non-alcoholic beverages, 
and miscellaneous goods and services contributed 3,1 percentage points to the 
overall inflation outcome. The Bank’s measure of core inflation, which excludes food, 
fuel and electricity, moderated from 5,7 per cent in May to 5,5 per cent in June.  
  
Producer price inflation for final manufactured goods continued its upward trend 
having reached a low point of 2,6 per cent in February. In April and May, the PPI 
measured 3,0 per cent and 3,6 per cent respectively. The latter was above market 
consensus, and driven by higher than expected food, beverage and tobacco product 
prices, which, at 2,2 percentage points, was also the main contributor to the annual 
change in the PPI. The upward trend is expected to persist, driven by rising 
agricultural crop prices and electricity tariffs.   
The inflation forecast of the Bank has changed marginally since the previous 
meeting of the MPC, with headline inflation now expected to average 5,0 per cent in 
2015, up from 4,9 per cent previously.  The forecast for the first two quarters of next 
year has also been revised up by 0,1 percentage point  to 6,9 per cent and 6,1 per 
cent respectively, with a return to within the target range by the third quarter. 
However, the forecast average inflation for both 2016 and 2017 is unchanged at 6,1 
per cent and 5,7 per cent.  
The forecast for core inflation is unchanged, and expected to average 5,6 per cent in 
2015, and moderating to 5,4 per cent and 5,2 per cent in the next two years. As 
before, much of the persistence of core inflation at these levels is attributed to high 
3 
 
levels of wage growth, currency depreciation and inflation expectations entrenched 
at the upper end of the target range.  
 
The headline inflation forecast assumes electricity price increases of 13,0 per cent 
from July 2016 and July 2017. Although the current multi-year price determination 
allows for an 8 per cent increase from July next year, Eskom is expected to apply for 
a claw-back on diesel usage, and this accounts for the additional 5 percentage point 
assumption in the model. The main assumptions underlying the model are listed in 
the annexure to this statement. 
 
Inflation expectations as reflected in the survey conducted by the Bureau for 
Economic Research at Stellenbosch University have shown a near-term 
deterioration, but are more or less unchanged over the 2 to 3 year horizon. Average 
inflation expectations for 2015 and 2016 increased by 0,2 percentage points, to 5,6 
per cent and 6,1 per cent, but declined marginally to 5,8 per cent for 2017. The 
deterioration was mainly driven by marked increases of 0,6  and 0,4 percentage 
points by analysts for 2015 and 2016, and smaller increases by business people. 
The expectations of analysts and trade unionists remain within the target, but close 
to the upper end of the target range. The expectations of business people are above 
the target range with a deterioration over all three years. Average 5-year inflation 
expectations increased from 5,8 per cent to 6,0 per cent.  
 
The median inflation expectations of analysts polled in the Reuters Econometer 
survey are almost identical to the Bank’s forecast. The break-even inflation 
expectations as reflected in the yield differential between conventional government 
4 
 
bonds and inflation linked bonds are relatively unchanged since the previous 
meeting, and remain above the target range for all maturities. 
 
Global economic growth has been revised downwards recently, mainly due to the 
weak first quarter outcome in the US. While the recovery in the US still appears to be 
on track amid continued improvements in the labour market, growth this year is 
expected to be closer to the 2 per cent level, compared with expectations of around 
3 per cent earlier in the year. The steady, but slow improvement in the euro area has 
continued, following a better-than-expected first quarter outcome. However, the 
outlook for the region will be dependent in part on avoiding negative spillovers from 
the Greek debt crisis. The near term risks from this crisis appear to have been 
averted for now, but the longer term sustainability of the Greek debt burden remains 
a concern. Growth in Japan is expected to remain positive but subdued. 
 
The Chinese economy grew at a year-on-year rate of 7,0 per cent in the second 
quarter, but some moderation is expected in the coming quarters. The sharp 
correction in the Chinese equity markets appears to have been contained by strong 
intervention by the authorities, and the impact on the broader economy is expected 
to be relatively limited, but it does point to some fragility in the financial sector.  The 
slowdown in China has continued to impact on commodity prices, with the platinum 
price, for example, declining to its lowest level in six years. The prospects for a 
number of other larger emerging market economies, particularly Russia and Brazil, 
remain weak. 
 
5 
 
Global inflation pressures, particularly in the advanced economies remain benign, 
reinforced by declining commodity prices, including oil. Against this backdrop, the 
monetary policy stances in most advanced and emerging market economies have 
either remained unchanged or become more accommodative since the previous 
MPC meeting, with the exception of Brazil where interest rates were increased 
further. Monetary policies in the advanced economies are likely to remain 
asynchronous: highly accommodative stances in the Eurozone and Japan are likely 
to persist for some time, while a start of monetary policy tightening is likely in the US 
sometime this year, followed by the UK. 
 
The rand exchange rate has been relatively volatile and depreciated significantly 
since the previous meeting of the MPC. The rand, along with a number of other 
emerging market currencies, has been particularly sensitive to changing global risk 
perceptions relating to the Greek crisis, the volatility in the Chinese equity markets, 
declining commodity prices and expectations of the start of US monetary policy 
tightening. Since the previous meeting of the MPC, the rand traded in a wide band of 
between R11,82 and R12,58 against the US dollar. Over the period, the rand has 
depreciated by 5,0 per cent against the US dollar, by 3,6 per cent against the euro 
and by 3,5 per cent on a trade-weighted basis. 
 
The rand found some support from the improved current account outcome of 4,8 per 
cent of GDP in the first quarter of 2015, and the more favourable recent trade data.  
Whilst these better outcomes may reflect the depreciated real effective exchange 
rate, further gains are likely to be constrained by the recent decline in commodity 
6 
 
prices. The Bank forecasts a current account deficit of around 4,6 per cent of GDP 
for the year. 
 
Global capital flows have remained relatively volatile against the backdrop of 
changing risk perceptions. This has been reflected in non-resident bond and equity 
flows: according to JSE data, non-residents were net sellers of South African 
government bonds to the value of R12,7 billion in May and June, but were net buyers 
of equities to the value of R17,7 billion. To date in July, non-residents have been net 
buyers of equities and bonds to the value of R3,7 billion and R2,4 billion respectively. 
 
The rand remains a significant risk factor to the inflation outlook given the 
vulnerability of the rand and long bond yields to possible US interest rate increases, 
as well as a deterioration in South Africa’s terms of trade. The inflation forecast 
assumes a relatively stable real effective exchange rate over the forecast period, 
implying a nominal effective depreciation in line with inflation differentials between 
South Africa and her major trading partners. A nominal depreciation in excess of this 
would pose an upside risk to inflation, although this risk could be ameliorated to 
some extent should the relatively low pass-through from the exchange rate to 
inflation persist. The extent to which US policy tightening is already priced into the 
exchange rate also remains uncertain. 
 
The domestic growth outlook remains subdued, amid continued electricity supply 
constraints, and weak business and consumer confidence. Growth in the first quarter 
of 2015 measured 1,3 per cent, and high frequency data suggest that the second 
quarter growth is likely to be broadly similar. The Bank’s forecast for growth in each 
7 
 
year of the forecast period has been revised down marginally, to 2,0 per cent in 2015 
and 2,1 per cent in 2016, and rising to 2,6 per cent in 2017 when some easing of the 
electricity supply constraint is assumed. However, the risks to growth are still 
assessed to be moderately on the downside. The recent further decline in the Bank’s 
composite leading business cycle indicator also suggests a continuation of the weak 
growth outlook.  
 
The RMB/BER business confidence index has declined for two consecutive quarters, 
measuring 43 index points in the second quarter of 2015, with confidence in the 
manufacturing sector particularly low, at 29 index points. The physical volume of 
manufacturing production has contracted on a month-on-month basis in three of the 
first five months of this year, and this sector is expected to record negative growth in 
the second quarter. Although the PMI improved in May and June, it remains around 
the 50 index point level, consistent with a constrained outlook. The mining sector, by 
contrast, has displayed some resilience, particularly in the PGM sub-sector, although 
the weaker platinum and palladium prices are expected to create further headwinds.  
 
Underlying this subdued growth outlook is the persistent weakness in growth in 
gross fixed capital formation, particularly by the private sector. These trends 
contributed to a contraction in non-agricultural formal sector employment on both a 
quarter-on-quarter basis, and a year-on-year basis. During the four quarters to the 
first quarter of 2015, over 41 000 jobs were shed, of which just over 30 000 were in 
the private sector.  
Although consumption expenditure of households improved somewhat in the first 
quarter of 2015, this was probably induced by temporary factors including the decline 
8 
 
in the petrol price and lower food price inflation. However, following the increase in 
personal income taxes alongside higher electricity tariffs and a reversal of the petrol 
price declines, the outlook for consumption expenditure has deteriorated. This 
negative outlook is reflected in slowing retail sales growth, declining motor vehicle 
sales and the continued weak pace in credit extended to households by the banking 
sector. Tighter affordability criteria as well as proposals to cap interest charges on 
unsecured loans are likely to constrain bank credit extension to households further.  
This is in contrast to the continued buoyant growth in credit extension to the 
corporate sector. Against this backdrop, the FNB/BER consumer confidence index 
reached a 14-year low in the second quarter of 2015. 
Notwithstanding the recent moderation in nominal wage growth, the pace of growth 
remains high and contributes to the persistence of inflation at higher levels. Year-on
year growth in nominal salaries and wages per worker moderated to 6,7 per cent in 
the first quarter of 2015, from 7,3 per cent in the previous quarter. Adjusting for 
productivity increases, due in part to employment reductions, labour cost increases 
declined to 4,1 per cent in the first quarter. According to Andrew Levy Employment 
Publications, the average settlement rate in collective bargaining agreements 
declined to 7,8 per cent in the first half of 2015, compared with 8,1 per cent in 2014 
as a whole. 
 
Food prices remain a concern to the MPC, despite the continued moderation of  food 
price inflation at the CPI level having measured 4,6 per cent in May and 4,3 per cent 
in June. However, the continuing drought in parts of the country has contributed to 
the upside risk to the outlook, despite benign global food price inflation. Maize and 
wheat prices have increased significantly since the beginning of the year, and we are 
9 
 
yet to see the full impact on consumer prices. At the PPI level, however, cereal and 
crop price inflation accelerated to 17,8 per cent in May, and both wheat and maize 
prices are now trading at around import parity levels.  
 
International oil prices have been somewhat weaker since the previous meeting of 
the MPC, following higher output by Saudi Arabia, and the prospects of a resumption 
of oil exports by Iran. This follows two consecutive months of oil prices in the range 
of US$60-65 per barrel. Since early July, spot prices have traded below US$60 per 
barrel, while futures prices are currently trading at around US$58 per barrel for 
December delivery. The Bank’s forecast assumes a moderate increase in oil prices 
over the forecast period. Domestic petrol prices have increased by about 90 cents 
per liter in the past two months, but should current trends persist, a price reduction of 
around 40 cents per litre is likely in August. 
While the June inflation outcomes were below expectations, this respite is expected 
to be temporary. The persistence of forecast inflation at elevated levels and the 
continued upside risks to the outlook remain a concern to the MPC. Although 
inflation is currently within the target range, given the lags in monetary policy 
changes on inflation, the focus of policy continues to be on the medium term trend, 
and to ensure that inflation remains comfortably and sustainably within the target 
range. 
Inflation is expected to breach the upper end of the target range for two quarters, 
and the medium term trajectory remains uncomfortably close to the upper end of the 
target range. The upside risks make this trajectory vulnerable to any significant 
changes in inflation pressures.   
10 
 
Although the risks of higher electricity tariffs did not materialise as yet, other upside 
risks persist. The rand remains vulnerable to global market reaction to US monetary 
policy normalisation, particularly in the context of South Africa’s twin deficits. The 
pressures on the exchange rate have been exacerbated by the recent significant 
decline in commodity prices, which are likely to impede the favourable current 
account adjustment. Some of the rand adjustment has already occurred since the 
previous meeting, but further reaction to US monetary policy tightening could cause 
inflation to diverge even further from target, and set in motion an exchange rate
inflation spiral.  Further upside risks are expected to come from food prices, which 
have yet to react to significant increases in spot prices of agricultural commodities. 
The MPC has indicated for some time that it is in a hiking cycle in response to rising 
inflation risks, and a normalisation of the policy rate over time. The MPC is cognisant 
of the fact that domestic inflation is not driven by demand factors, and the outlook for 
household consumption expenditure remains subdued. Economic growth remains 
subdued, constrained by electricity supply disruptions and low business and 
consumer confidence and the risks to the outlook remain on the downside. However, 
as emphasised previously, we have to be mindful of the risk of second-round effects 
on inflation, and the committee is concerned that failure to act against these 
heightened pressures and risks will cause inflation expectations to become 
entrenched at higher levels. 
The MPC has therefore decided to continue on its path of gradual policy 
normalisation. Accordingly, the repurchase rate will increase by 25 basis points to 
6,0 per cent per annum with effect from Friday 24 July 2015.  Four members 
11 
 
favoured a 25 basis point increase, while two members favoured an unchanged 
stance. 
The expected inflation trajectory implies that the real repurchase rate remains low 
and possibly still slightly negative at times, and below its longer term average. The 
monetary policy stance therefore remains supportive of the domestic economy. The 
continuing challenge is for monetary policy to achieve a fine balance between 
achieving our core mandate of price stability and not undermining short term growth 
unduly. Monetary policy actions will continue to be sensitive, to the extent possible, 
to the fragile state of the economy. As before, any future moves will therefore be 
highly data dependent. 
 
 