Since the previous meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee, the economic 
growth outlook has deteriorated against the backdrop of protracted strike action 
in the mining and manufacturing sectors. The economy contracted in the first 
quarter of 2014, and the growth outlook for the rest of the year remains subdued 
amid low business confidence. Compounding the MPC’s policy dilemma, inflation 
has breached the upper end of the target range, driven primarily by the exchange 
rate depreciation and rising food prices, while a possible wage-price spiral 
resulting from recent wage settlements and wage demands considerably in 
excess of inflation and productivity growth have added to the upside risk to the 
inflation outlook.  
 
The year-on-year inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) 
for all urban areas measured 6,6 per cent in May, up from 6,0 per cent and 6,1 
 2 
per cent in March and April 2014 respectively. The main driver of this marked 
acceleration was food and non-alcoholic beverage price inflation which measured 
8,8 per cent in May compared with 7,0 per cent and 7,8 per cent in the previous 
two months. This category contributed 1,3 percentage points to the headline CPI 
outcome, compared with a recent low of 0,5 percentage points in December 
2013. The categories of food, housing utilities and transport together accounted 
for 4,2 percentage points of the inflation outcome in May, compared with 3,7 
percentage points in the previous month. The transport index increased at an 
annual rate of 8,9 per cent, from 6,8 per cent in April, despite a 15c per litre 
decline in the petrol price in May. Core inflation, which excludes food, petrol and 
electricity, remained unchanged at 5,5  per cent for the third consecutive month. 
Administered price inflation excluding petrol was unchanged from the previous 
month at 6,5 per cent. The headline producer price inflation for final 
manufactured goods moderated slightly from 8,8 per cent in April to 8,7 per cent 
in May, driven in part by lower agricultural product inflation. 
  
The marginal improvement in the Bank’s forecast of headline inflation at the 
previous meeting has been more or less reversed, as recent food price 
developments surprised on the upside. Inflation is now expected to average 6,3 
per cent in 2014, compared with 6,2 per cent previously, with the quarterly peak 
of 6,6 per cent (previously 6,5 per cent) still expected in the fourth quarter, 
following a slight moderation in the third quarter. The forecast average inflation 
for 2015 increased to 5,9 per cent from 5,8 per cent, while the forecast for 2016 
 3 
increased marginally to 5,6 per cent, and to 5,5 per cent in the final quarter of 
that year. Inflation is still expected to return to within the target band during the 
second quarter of 2015, provided that there are no further shocks to the system, 
particularly from possible higher tariff increases being granted to Eskom by Nersa 
from 2015.  
The forecast for core inflation is unchanged. This measure is expected to 
average 5,6 per cent  and 5,7 per cent in 2014 and 2015 respectively, 
moderating to 5,5 per cent in 2016, with the moderate upward pressure coming 
from the lagged effects of the exchange rate depreciation rather than evidence of 
strong domestic demand pressures.  As before, the MPC sees the risks to the 
headline inflation forecast to be skewed to the upside. 
 
Inflation expectations as reflected in the survey conducted by the Bureau for 
Economic Research at Stellenbosch University have remained anchored at the 
upper end of the target band. The average inflation expectation of analysts, 
business people and trade union officials for this year and next year has 
remained unchanged for six consecutive quarters at 6,1 per cent for both years, 
declining to 5,9 per cent in 2016. Within these categories, the largest change was 
by business people for 2016, where expectations increased from 6,2 per cent in 
the previous survey to 6,4 per cent. However, their expectation for 2015 
moderated slightly. Inflation expectations of households for 2014 declined from 
6,7 per cent in the first quarter to 6,3 per cent in the second quarter. 
 
 4 
The Reuters survey of inflation expectations of economic analysts conducted in 
May is more or less unchanged since the previous survey, with a slight upward 
shift. The outcome of the survey shows a divergence of views among analysts as 
to whether inflation will peak in the second or fourth quarter of 2014. On average, 
the expectation is for inflation to peak in the second quarter, at an average of 6,4 
per cent, and to return to within the target range in the first quarter of 2015. 
According to the survey, annual inflation is expected to average 6,2 per cent in 
2014, and 5,7 per cent and 5,5 per cent in the subsequent two years 
respectively. 
  
The global economy continues to exhibit mixed signals regarding the economic 
growth outlook. Since the previous meeting of the MPC, consensus forecasts for 
growth in 2014 have been revised down for the US and the Eurozone, but those 
for Japan and the UK have been revised upwards. The earlier optimism that the 
US would grow at around 3 per cent in 2014 has been moderated following the 
2,9 per cent annualised contraction in the first quarter, partly a result of severe 
weather conditions and a decline in expenditure on health care. Most analysts 
now expect US growth to be closer to 2 per cent. This weaker growth is despite 
larger-than-expected improvements in the unemployment rate. The outlook for 
the Eurozone has also deteriorated, following weak industrial output in Germany 
in May, and slowing growth in France and Italy.  Real output in Japan is expected 
to contract in the second quarter following the surge in expenditure in the first 
quarter in advance of the increase of consumption taxes. The UK recovery, 
 5 
however, appears to be sustained with growth of around 3 per cent expected in 
2014. 
 
The outlook for emerging markets remains relatively subdued, but some 
emerging Asian economies have benefited from stronger US growth. The 
Chinese economy is expected to grow just under 7,5 per cent in 2014, although 
concerns about the shadow banking system remain. Subdued growth is expected 
in a number of emerging markets including Brazil, Russia, Thailand and 
Argentina. 
 
Global financial market developments remain dominated by expectations of 
changes in monetary policy in the advanced economies, amid concerns that the 
current low interest rate and low volatility environment may encourage excessive 
risk taking and asset price bubbles. By contrast to a number of emerging market 
economies, inflation remains benign in the advanced economies, although the 
risk of deflation in the Eurozone persists. The UK is expected to be the first 
advanced economy to raise interest rates, but at a moderate pace, while the US 
is generally not expected to begin the process of normalisation before the third 
quarter of 2015. However, the tapering of bond purchases by the Fed is expected 
to continue at a steady pace. This process is fully discounted in the markets, and 
is expected to be completed later this year.  
 
 6 
By contrast, the ECB has recently announced a range of new monetary policy 
measures aimed at stimulating the economy through encouraging bank lending 
and preventing deflation, while Japanese monetary policy is expected to remain 
highly stimulatory for some time. Since the previous meeting of the MPC, a 
number of countries have reduced their policy rates, including the Eurozone, 
Sweden, Mexico, Hungary and Turkey, while the tightening cycle continued in 
New Zealand. 
 
The exchange rate of the rand continues to pose an upside risk to the inflation 
outlook. Having appreciated to a level of R10,29 against the US dollar soon after 
the previous MPC meeting, the rand exchange rate followed a depreciating trend, 
reaching a new trading range of between R10,60 and R10,80 since the beginning 
of June. Since the previous meeting the rand has depreciated by 2,6 per cent on 
a trade-weighted basis. The appreciation of the rand in May was in response to 
more benign global factors as market participants absorbed the forward guidance 
provided by the central banks in the advanced economies. This contributed to 
lower risk aversion and renewed flows to emerging markets in general. Since the 
previous meeting, non-resident net purchases of bonds and equities amounted to 
R7,2 billion, and R44,2 billion since the beginning of February.  
 
Despite these inflows, since early June the rand has largely decoupled from its 
emerging market peers, and depreciated relative to most currencies, as it reacted 
to deteriorating domestic fundamentals. These included the negative GDP growth 
 7 
rate, the adverse reports from the ratings agencies, and the protracted nature of 
the platinum and metal workers strikes. The impact of the platinum sector strikes 
on exports began to be felt in April and May, and it is estimated that during these 
two months the value of platinum group metals (PGM) exports was around R20 
billion lower than during the first quarter. This is likely to put pressure on the 
current account of the balance of payments in the second quarter, following a 
narrowing of the deficit in the first quarter to 4,5 per cent of GDP. 
 
South Africa’s growth outlook has deteriorated since the previous meeting of the 
MPC, compounded by continued labour disruptions. Following a contraction of 
0,6 per cent in the first quarter, the outlook for the second quarter is expected to 
be positive, but subdued, particularly in the light of weak mining and 
manufacturing data in May. The Bank’s latest forecast, which assumes a speedy 
resolution of the metal workers’ strike, sees growth in 2014 at 1,7 per cent, 
compared with 2,1 per cent previously and 2,8 per cent at the beginning of the 
year. Growth forecasts for the coming two calendar years have been reduced to 
2,9 per cent and 3,2 per cent, from 3,1 per cent and 3,4 per cent respectively. 
The RMB/BER Business Confidence Index remained low and unchanged at 41 
index points in the second quarter of 2014, with a sharp decline particularly 
evident among manufacturers. The Bank’s leading indicator of economic activity 
declined moderately, reflecting subdued growth expectations. 
 
 8 
The weak business confidence is mirrored in the 2,6 per cent growth in gross 
fixed capital formation in the first quarter of 2014. Growth in fixed investment by 
the private sector, which accounts for about two thirds of gross fixed capital 
formation, weakened further, from 2,4 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2013 to 1,0 
per cent in the first quarter of 2014. 
  
The mining sector contracted by an annualised 24,7 per cent in the first quarter of 
2014, and although mainly driven by the strike-induced decline in PGM output, 
the contraction was fairly broad-based across the sector. Despite a higher-than
expected performance in April, the data for May show that the outlook for the 
second quarter is also bleak. In May, the physical volume of mining output 
declined by (a non-annualised) 3,1 per cent on a month-to-month basis, and by 
5,6 per cent on a three-month-to-three month basis, with PGM output declining 
by 34,1 per cent. While the strike is over and miners are returning to work, PGM 
production is not expected to normalise for some time, and possible shaft 
closures could reduce the longer term potential of the sector. 
 
The manufacturing sector performance in the first two months of the second 
quarter has also been disappointing, following the 4,4 per cent contraction in the 
first quarter. In May, manufacturing output declined by 3,7 per cent on a year-on
year basis, and by 2,0 per cent on a three-month-on-three-month basis.   The 
sector was negatively impacted by electricity supply constraints and the platinum 
sector strike, while the current strike by metal workers is likely to undermine the 
 9 
outlook for the third quarter. The Kagiso PMI registered a slight improvement in 
June, measuring 46,6 index points, but has remained below the neutral 50 index 
point level for three consecutive months.  
 
Trends in employment growth are indicative of the weak private sector 
investment. Although formal non-agricultural employment increased for the third 
consecutive quarter in the first quarter of 2014, all the gains were in the public 
sector. While overall employment increased by 42,000 jobs in the year to the end 
of March, 49,000 jobs were created in the public sector while the private sector 
shed jobs, particularly in the mining sector where almost 29,000  jobs were lost. 
 
Final consumption expenditure by households remains the main driver of GDP 
growth, but with a declining contribution of 1,2 percentage points in the first 
quarter of 2014. Growth in household consumption expenditure, which measured 
2,6 per cent in 2013, declined to 1,8 per cent in the first quarter of 2014, with a 
marked moderation in the growth of expenditure on durable goods and a 
contraction in spending on non-durable goods. Real retail sales growth 
contracted by 0,8 per cent on a three-month-to-three-month basis in May, and 
increased at a month-to-month rate of 0,8 per cent. Domestic motor vehicle sales 
declined by 2,3 per cent on a year-on-year basis, but increased by 4,7 per cent 
on a month-to-month basis in June. Despite these weak trends, consumer 
confidence surprised on the upside in the second quarter, with the FNB/BER 
 10 
consumer confidence index increasing from -6 to 4 index points, although 
respondents do not deem the present time as appropriate to buy durable goods. 
 
Growth over twelve months in total loans and advances to the private sector 
measured 8,2 per cent in May 2014, but the divergent trends in bank credit 
extended to households and the corporate sector have continued. Growth in 
credit extended to the corporate sector has been steadily increasing since the 
beginning of the year, measuring 13,3 per cent in May, due in part to renewable 
energy contracts. By contrast, growth in credit extended to the private sector has 
continued to trend downwards, to measure 4,3 per cent in May. Twelve-month 
growth in general loans to households, mainly unsecured lending, declined to 2,8 
per cent in May, its lowest growth since February 2005. Mortgage credit 
extension remained within the 2 to 3 per cent range observed since January 
2013, and instalment sale credit and leasing finance also continued to moderate, 
from growth rates of around 13 per cent in the second half of 2013 to 8,6 per cent 
in May. These credit extension trends to households reflect a combination of 
weakening household consumption expenditure, and stricter bank lending criteria 
for unsecured loans in particular. Household debt to disposable income remains 
elevated, but declined marginally to 74,5 per cent in the first quarter of 2014. 
 
The trend in wage settlements pose an upside risk to the inflation outlook, and 
these pressures are likely to intensify in the current difficult labour relations 
environment. According to Andrew Levy Employment Publications, the average 
 11 
wage settlement rate in collective bargaining agreements increased from 7,9 per 
cent in the first quarter of 2014 to 8,1 per cent in the second quarter. However, 
increases over four quarters in nominal unit labour costs in the formal non
agricultural sector, declined from 5,9 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2013 to 4,8 
per cent in the first quarter of 2014. The MPC is concerned that recent wage 
settlements in the mining sector and current demands in the metals sector could 
set a precedent for wage demands more generally. Unless accompanied by 
higher productivity, such settlements could generate a wage price spiral, and are 
also likely to have a negative impact on employment trends. While the focus has 
generally been on wage demands, there is an imperative for attention to also be 
paid to excessive salaries and bonuses of management and executives.   
 
Food prices have been one of the main drivers of inflation since the beginning of 
the year and have generally surprised on the upside in recent months. There are, 
however, some tentative indications that we may be near the peak: in May, 
manufactured food producer price inflation moderated for the first time since 
October 2013, and measured 8,9 per cent, down from 9,5 per cent in April. 
Agricultural producer price inflation declined from a recent peak of 13,3 per cent 
in March, to 6,7  per cent in May reflecting in part the sharp decline in maize 
prices to export parity price levels. Prices of cereals and other crops declined by 
0,8 per cent in May, having reached a recent peak of 27,6 per cent in February. 
Global food price pressures are also benign, with the year-on-year inflation rates 
as reflected in the FAO food price index being negative for 12 consecutive 
 12 
months. Apart from weather-related risks, the overall trend in food prices will 
remain highly sensitive to exchange rate developments. 
 
Despite recent geopolitical risks, particularly in the Ukraine and Iraq, international 
oil prices have remained relatively stable. Apart from a brief spike to a level of 
around US$115 per barrel in June, the price of Brent crude oil has generally 
traded in a range of US$105 and US$110 per barrel, and is currently at around 
US$105 per barrel. Domestic petrol prices have therefore been driven primarily 
by exchange rate changes. Following the appreciation of the rand in April, the 
petrol price was reduced by a total of 37 cents per litre in May and June, but this 
was largely reversed in July when the price increased by 31 cents per litre. 
Should current trends persist, a further small increase in the petrol price can be 
expected in August. 
 
The MPC remains concerned about weak growth, widening output gap and the 
negative employment outlook. The strike in the platinum sector contributed to the 
downward revision of the growth forecast, and the latest forecast has not factored 
in the possibility of a protracted work stoppage by the metal workers, which 
would potentially have much wider ramifications because of the direct linkages to 
other sectors of the economy. This weak growth outlook, however, is not 
something that monetary policy can ameliorate. 
The MPC is also increasingly concerned about the inflation outlook, and the 
further upside risks to the forecast. Although the exchange rate remains a key 
 13 
factor in this regard, the possibility of a wage-price spiral should wage 
settlements well in excess of inflation and productivity growth become an 
economy-wide norm has increased. Although the inflation trajectory has not 
deteriorated markedly since the previous meeting, upside risks have increased, 
and it is expected to remain uncomfortably close to the upper end of the target 
range when it does eventually return to within the target. The upside risk factors 
make this trajectory highly vulnerable to any significant changes in inflation 
pressures. 
Although inflation expectations have remained relatively anchored, should 
inflation persist outside the target band, these expectations risk becoming 
dislodged.  
The MPC is, however, cognisant of the fact that the inflation pressures do not 
reflect excess demand conditions in the economy. Household consumption 
expenditure remains weak, and credit extension to households is contracting in 
real terms. However, we do have to be mindful of second-round effects of supply 
side shocks. 
The MPC faces an increasingly difficult dilemma of rising inflation and slowing 
growth. The core mandate of the Bank remains price stability, but at the same 
time, in achieving this mandate, we have to be mindful of the impact of our 
actions on economic growth and tread a fine line between acting effectively to 
address the inflation objective, while not undermining growth unduly.  
 14 
The MPC has decided to continue on its gradual normalisation path and raise the 
repurchase rate by 25 basis points to 5,75 per cent per annum, effective from 
Friday 18 July. Given the expected inflation trajectory, the real repurchase rate 
remains slightly negative and well below its longer term neutral level. The 
monetary policy stance remains supportive of the domestic economy, and, as 
before, any future moves will be gradual and highly data dependent. 
We would like to reiterate that monetary policy should not be seen as the growth 
engine of the economy. The sources of the below par growth performance are 
largely outside the realms of monetary policy. In the short term, an improvement 
in the interaction and relationships between management and labour is essential 
to foster a climate of trust and confidence, and get South Africa back to work. 
Given that the key headwinds preventing a return to trend growth are structural, 
there is an urgent need to implement necessary structural reforms, as envisaged 
in the National Development Plan, in order to achieve higher and more inclusive 
growth. 