Since the previous meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee, the global 
economic environment remains challenging, notwithstanding some improvement 
in sentiment. Key factors affecting the environment include the possibility of an 
earlier-than-expected increase in the US policy rate in 2015, further evidence of a 
slowdown in China, and geo-political tensions arising from the situation in 
Ukraine.  
 
The domestic economic outlook remains subdued amid continued strikes in the 
platinum sector and uncertainty regarding a stable and sufficient electricity supply 
in the coming months. While the most recent inflation forecasts suggest marginal 
improvements in the medium term, upside risks to the inflation outlook persist 
despite the recent appreciation of the rand, which remains vulnerable to shifts in 
2 
 
global risk sentiment and adverse domestic developments. Together with 
downside risks to growth, this continues to pose a dilemma for monetary policy. 
 
The year-on-year inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) 
for all urban areas measured 5,8 per cent and 5,9 per cent in January and 
February 2014 respectively, up from 5,4 per cent in December. This marked 
upward trend was in line with the Bank’s forecasts. Food and non-alcoholic 
beverage price inflation reversed its previous downward trend, measuring 4,3 per 
cent and 5,4 per cent in the past two months, compared with a recent low of 3,5 
per cent in December. The contribution of this category to the overall CPI inflation 
increase was 0,8 percentage points in February compared with 0,5 in December. 
The petrol price, which was the other main contributor to the higher CPI inflation 
in February, increased at a year-on-year rate of 14,0 per cent. Core inflation, 
which excludes food, petrol and electricity, was unchanged at 5,3 per cent, the 
sixth consecutive month at this level. This was despite upward pressures from 
exchange rate sensitive categories such as clothing and footwear, and motor 
vehicle inflation, which were offset to some extent by a lower rate of increase in 
medical insurance costs. Administered price inflation excluding petrol measured 
6,9 per cent. The headline producer price inflation for final manufactured goods 
measured 7,7 per cent in February, compared with 7,0 per cent in January. 
  
The Bank’s forecast of headline inflation is unchanged for 2014, and is expected 
to average 6,3 per cent, with the peak of 6,6 per cent still expected in the fourth 
3 
 
quarter. The forecast average inflation for 2015 declined from 6,0 per cent 
previously, to 5,8 per cent, with inflation expected to average 5,6 per cent in the 
final quarter of that year, compared with 5,9 per cent previously. This 
improvement is mainly the result of the lagged effect of the repo rate increase. 
Inflation is still expected to breach the upper end of the target range in the 
second quarter of 2014, and to return to within the target range in the second 
quarter of 2015, when it is expected to measure 5,9 per cent.  
 
The outlook for core inflation has improved, and is expected to average 5,6 per 
cent  in both 2014 and 2015, compared with the previous forecast of 5,8 per cent 
and 5,9 per cent for these two years respectively. Notwithstanding this 
improvement, the upward pressures continue to be seen to be coming from the 
lagged effects of the exchange rate depreciation.  The MPC still assesses the 
risks to the inflation outlook to be skewed to the upside, as extended periods of 
overshooting of the exchange rate remain a possibility in the current uncertain 
global environment. There is also a risk that the current low level of pass-through 
may not persist. 
 
Inflation expectations as measured by the survey conducted by the BER in the 
first quarter of 2014 remained unchanged at an average of 6,1 per cent for both 
2014 and 2015, with inflation of 5,9 per cent expected in 2016. Although the 2014 
expectations of analysts increased to 6,1 per cent from 5,6 per cent in the 
previous survey, expectations of business people declined to 6,2 per cent from 
4 
 
6,4 per cent, with trade union expectations unchanged at 6,1 per cent. Analysts 
expect inflation to moderate during the next two years to within the target range, 
whilst business and labour respondents expect inflation to remain steady at just 
over 6 per cent, indicating that expectations continue to be relatively well 
anchored, albeit at the upper end of the target band.  
 
The Reuters survey of economic analysts conducted in March shows that 
inflation expectations of economists are more or less unchanged since the 
previous survey, and also remain, on average, anchored at the upper end of the 
band. The expectation is that inflation will breach the upper end of the target 
range in the third and fourth quarters of 2014, at an average rate of 6,1 per cent, 
before returning to within the target range. 
 
The global economic recovery continues to be uneven, with a first quarter 
slowdown in growth in the advanced economies compared with the fourth quarter 
of 2013, due in part to severe weather conditions, particularly in the US. 
Nevertheless, the underlying US growth prospects remain relatively favourable 
despite a slower pace of employment growth, amid positive investment and 
consumption indicators. The UK economy continues to show signs of sustained 
improvement, with declining inflation and unemployment rates as well as a 
buoyant housing market. The Eurozone growth prospects remain weak, although 
there are signs of a modest recovery, and the unemployment rate appears to 
5 
 
have peaked. Japanese economic growth in the fourth quarter was lower than 
expected, and there are indications that the recovery could be losing momentum. 
  
The global outlook, however, is overshadowed by unfolding developments in the 
Ukraine and Russia regarding Crimea, although to date contagion effects have 
been limited to those countries with direct trade and financial links with the 
region. The other downside risk factor relates to a deteriorating outlook in a 
number of the larger emerging market economies, including Brazil, Russia and 
China. Recent short-term data from China indicate that economic growth could 
decline below the government’s target of 7,5 per cent, at a time of increased risks 
in the banking sector.  
 
The slowdown in China is expected to maintain downward pressure on global 
commodity prices, particularly industrial commodities, while there are upside risks 
to some commodities, particularly oil and grains, from the tensions in Crimea.  
 
Global inflation pressures remain benign, particularly in the advanced economies. 
Since the previous meeting of the MPC, the US has continued its steady path of 
tapering, although the financial markets now believe that the first interest rate 
increases may occur earlier in 2015 than previously expected. Over the same 
period, monetary policy has been tightened in New Zealand, Brazil and Russia, 
and loosened in Israel, Thailand, Chile and Hungary. 
  
6 
 
The exchange rate of the rand has been relatively volatile since the previous 
meeting of the MPC, having fluctuated in a wide range between R11,39 and 
R10,60 against the US dollar. There has been an appreciating trend over this 
period, in line with an improving risk sentiment towards emerging markets. Since 
the previous meeting of the MPC, the rand has appreciated by about 2,4 per cent 
against the US dollar, and by 2,2 per cent on a trade-weighted basis. 
 
While the risk to the inflation outlook from the exchange rate may have 
moderated somewhat since the previous meeting, these risks are still assessed 
to be on the upside. The MPC is of the view that the exchange rate will continue 
to be highly sensitive to both domestic and global developments, remaining 
prone to further bouts of volatility and protracted periods of overshooting. 
  
The current account of the balance of payments narrowed significantly from 6,4 
per cent of GDP (revised down from 6,8 per cent previously) in the third quarter 
of 2013, to 5,1 per cent of GDP in the following quarter, with a deficit for the year 
of 5,8 per cent. The contraction of the trade account was a result of both a 3,6 
per cent decline in the value of merchandise imports and a 0,9 per cent increase 
in export earnings. Although we expect the current account to respond to the 
depreciated exchange rate, this adjustment is likely to be gradual and some 
widening of the trade deficit is expected in the first quarter of 2014. Constraining 
factors include the protracted nature of the strike in the platinum sector, and the 
relatively inelastic import demand, particularly with respect to imported capital 
7 
 
equipment. Promisingly, net exports made positive contributions to GDP growth 
in the final two quarters of 2013. 
 
Tapering by the US Fed and the expectation of US interest rate normalisation 
continued to impact on the pattern of global capital flows and financial market 
volatility. The domestic yield curve flattened since the previous MPC meeting, as 
the short end increased in response to monetary tightening, while the long end of 
the curve shifted downwards. In contrast to emerging markets in general, South 
Africa experienced net inflows into the equity markets in February and March, 
totalling R11,6 billion, following net sales of R25,1 billion between November 
2013 and January 2014. Non-residents remained net sellers of bonds but at a 
slower pace: net sales of bonds amounted to R46,0 billion over the same three 
month period, but moderated to R1,2 billion in February, and net purchases of 
R2,1 billion in March to date.  
 
The domestic economic growth outlook remains subdued. Despite a rebound in 
the fourth quarter of 2013, when an annualised growth rate of 3,8 per cent was 
recorded, economic growth is expected to remain below potential of between 3,0 
per cent and 3,5 per cent in 2014, with a consequent widening output gap. The 
Bank’s forecast for economic growth has declined marginally to 2,6 per cent in 
2014, compared with 2,8 per cent previously, while the forecast for 2015 has 
been revised down from 3,3 per cent to 3,1 per cent. The risks to this forecast are 
seen to be on the downside, given the protracted strike in the platinum sector and 
8 
 
electricity supply constraints. This deterioration comes amid continued low levels 
of business confidence, with the RMB/BER business confidence index declining 
to 41 index points in the first quarter of 2014, the fourth consecutive month at a 
level below the neutral 50 index points. The sideways movement of the 
composite leading business cycle indicator of the Bank also points to a restrained 
outlook. 
 
The growth outcome in the fourth quarter of 2013 was led by strong growth in the 
manufacturing sector in particular, following the strike-induced contraction in the 
previous quarter. In January, a 2,5 per cent year-on-year rate of growth in 
manufacturing output was recorded. According to the BER manufacturing survey, 
business confidence in the sector remains low despite increasing to 41 index 
points in the first quarter, from 36 previously. There are, however, some positive 
signs in the sector, with the Kagiso PMI increasing to 51,7 index points in 
February, and the BER’s indicators for manufacturing export sales and orders 
improving further in the first quarter of 2014, to their highest level in 10 years.  
 
Despite a strong performance in the fourth quarter, the outlook for the mining 
sector remains bleak: mining output contracted at a month-on-month rate of 1,1 
per cent in January, and the on-going strike in the platinum sector is likely to 
impact adversely on mining output and exports. 
 
9 
 
Growth in real gross fixed capital formation accelerated to 4,7 per cent in 2013, 
compared with 4,4 per cent in the previous year. During the past year, real capital 
outlays by the private sector increased by 5,5 per cent, while public corporations 
and general government investment increased by 3,1 per cent and 3,5 per cent 
respectively. 
 
Consistent with moderate economic growth, employment growth has remained 
weak. According to the Quarterly Employment Statistics (QES) of Statistics South 
Africa, employment levels in the formal non-agricultural sector increased 
marginally at a seasonally adjusted rate of 0,2 per cent in the fourth quarter of 
2013, or by 5,100 employment opportunities. In the year to the fourth quarter of 
2013, the increase was 0,5 per cent or 40,900 jobs, with the public sector 
contributing 39,000 of these jobs. Overall, private sector employment declined 
during the fourth quarter, with losses most pronounced in the gold mining, 
construction and electricity sectors.  
 
The weakening trend in the growth in household consumption expenditure 
continued into the final quarter of 2013, with growth of 2,0 per cent recorded, and 
its contribution to GDP growth declining from 2,3 percentage points in 2012 to 1,7 
percentage points in 2013. Growth for the year averaged 2,6 per cent, while 
consumption expenditure by general government averaged 2,4 per cent. 
Household spending on durable goods remained firm, but grew at a slower pace 
of 6,9 per cent, and is likely to moderate further as vehicle sales come under 
10 
 
increasing pressure. Total domestic new vehicle sales declined in February by 
2,6 per cent on a month-to-month basis and by 3,1 per cent year-on-year. 
Although real retail trade sales exceeded market expectations in January, 
following a month-to-month increase of 0,8 per cent, and a 6,8 per cent increase 
year-on-year, the outlook for consumption expenditure is expected to be 
constrained by slow employment growth, high debt levels of consumers, slow 
rates of growth in credit extension and the higher interest rate environment. 
 
Growth in government consumption expenditure is expected to be contained. 
According to the recent budget, the expenditure cap has been maintained, and a 
consolidated budget deficit of 4,0 per cent of GDP is estimated for 2014/15, in 
line with that of the past fiscal year. A faster pace of fiscal consolidation is 
indicated, with the deficit to GDP ratio expected to decline to 2,8 per cent in 
2016/17. 
 
Bank credit extension to the private sector has maintained its weak underlying 
trend, particularly with respect to credit extended to households, reinforcing 
expected pressures on household consumption expenditure. By contrast, credit 
extension to the corporate sector was relatively robust, with growth rates of 
around 10 per cent. Although twelve-month growth in total loans and advances to 
the private sector increased from 6,4 per cent in December to 7,6 per cent in 
January, credit extension to households increased by 5,5 per cent and 5,6 per 
cent in these two months respectively. This probably reflects both supply and 
11 
 
demand side considerations. Mortgage lending remained weak, with twelve
month growth of 2,1 per cent in January, amid moderate house price growth. 
Twelve-month growth in general loans, mainly unsecured lending, to households 
continued its downward trend, measuring 5,0 per cent in January, the lowest rate 
of growth since February 2005. Instalment sale credit and leasing finance has 
remained buoyant but growing at a more moderate pace, in line with declining 
vehicle sales. 
 
The trend in wage settlements has remained relatively unchanged. According to 
Andrew Levy Employment Publications, the overall average wage settlement rate 
in collective bargaining agreements measured 7,9 per cent in 2013, compared 
with 7,6 per cent in 2012. Data from Stats SA show that the growth in nominal 
remuneration per worker increased from 6,7 per cent in the year to the third 
quarter of 2013, to 7,0 per cent in the fourth quarter. Once the slight increase in 
productivity growth is accounted for, this translates into a unit labour cost 
increase of 5,2 per cent in the fourth quarter. While this appears to be relatively 
contained, there are wide variations across sectors, and the outcome of wage 
negotiations during the year in an unsettled labour relations environment will be 
an important determinant of inflation pressures. 
 
As anticipated, the favourable trend of food prices in the consumer price index 
has reversed, and pressures are expected on headline inflation from this source, 
despite the moderation of prices at the global level. Having reached a recent low 
12 
 
of 3,5 per cent in December 2013, consumer food price inflation increased to 4,3 
per cent and 5,6 per cent in the subsequent two months.  Final manufactured 
producer food price inflation accelerated to 7,6 per cent in February and further 
pressures are evident in the agricultural producer price inflation for cereals and 
other crops which accelerated from -8,2 per cent in August 2013 to 27,6 per cent 
in February 2014. This contributed to the 7,4 per cent increase in bread and 
cereals prices at the consumer price level in February.  The wheat and maize 
prices reflect exchange rate pressures and domestic drought conditions. 
Although futures prices indicate some possible moderation in coming months 
following the recent rains, near-term pressures remain. 
 
International oil prices have been relatively unaffected by the Crimean crisis, and 
the price of Brent crude oil fluctuated between a relatively narrow range of 
US$106 and US$111 per barrel since the previous meeting. The exchange rate 
has been the main driver of the rand petrol price, which increased by a 
cumulative 75 cent per litre in February and March. The recent appreciation of 
the rand has resulted in a current over-recovery in the petrol price, and this is 
expected to offset in part the 20 cent per litre fuel levy increase, due to be 
implemented in April.  
 
The Monetary Policy Committee is acutely aware of the policy dilemma of rising 
inflation pressures in a subdued economic growth environment. Despite a 
13 
 
marginal improvement in the medium term inflation forecast, the trajectory 
remains uncomfortably close to the upper end of the target range.  
The main upside risk to the forecast continues to come from the exchange rate, 
which, despite the recent relative stability, remains vulnerable to global 
rebalancing. The expected normalisation of monetary policy in advanced 
economies is unlikely to be linear or smooth, and the timing and pace is 
uncertain.  
 
The rand is also vulnerable to domestic idiosyncratic factors, including protracted 
work stoppages, electricity supply constraints, and the slow adjustment of the 
current account deficit. Pass-through from the exchange rate to prices has been 
relatively muted to date but there is some evidence that it is accelerating. 
However, the forecast already incorporates a higher pass-through than has been 
experienced up to now. 
 
At the same time, the domestic economic outlook remains fragile, with the risks 
assessed to be on the downside. Demand pressures remain benign as 
consumption expenditure continues to slow amid weakening credit extension to 
households and high levels of household indebtedness. The upward trend in the 
core inflation forecast is assessed to reflect exchange rate pressures rather than 
underlying demand pressures.   
 
14 
 
Given the lags with which monetary policy operates, the MPC will continue to 
focus on the medium term inflation trajectory. The committee is aware that too 
slow a pace of tightening could undermine inflation expectations and may require 
more aggressive tightening in the future.  Consistent with our mandate, a fine 
balance is required to ensure that inflation is contained while minimising the cost 
to output. 
 
The real policy rate is currently below what can be considered normal in the long 
run and is likely to increase over the medium term. The pace of tightening will 
depend on a number of factors including projected inflation, inflation 
expectations, the state of the economy and global developments. At this meeting 
the MPC has decided to keep the repurchase rate unchanged at 5,5 per cent per 
annum.  
 
We wish to reiterate that even though we are in a tightening cycle, there will not 
necessarily be a change in the stance at every meeting, and that the increments 
may not always be of the same magnitude