There are a number of key developments that this meeting of the Monetary 
Policy Committee (MPC) had to consider, not least among them on the domestic 
front the challenge of moderate growth, rising inflation, a depreciated currency, a 
wider current account deficit as well as difficult labour relations and 
unemployment that remains stubbornly high. 
 
Since the previous meeting of the MPC the domestic inflation outlook has 
deteriorated slightly. Risks posed by the depreciation of the rand exchange rate 
have overshadowed the more favourable developments, including lower 
electricity price increases and some moderation in food price inflation. 
Nevertheless inflation is expected to remain contained within the target range 
apart from a temporary breach in the third quarter of 2013. The domestic 
 2 
economic growth prospects remain fragile amid continued tensions in the labour 
market, particularly in the mining sector. 
 
The global economy is still characterised by a multispeed recovery. However, 
recent events in Europe, particularly as they affect Cyprus, have increased risk 
and uncertainty in the region, and have the potential to reignite the banking and 
sovereign debt crisis and undermine growth prospects further. The global outlook 
is also clouded by the fiscal gridlock in the United States that remains 
unresolved. 
 
The year-on-year inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) 
for all urban areas was 5,9 per cent in February 2013, up from 5,4 per cent in 
January. The upside surprise in the February was mainly due to the increase in 
medical insurance costs, which resulted in the contribution to CPI from 
miscellaneous goods and services increasing from 0,7 percentage points to 1,1 
percentage points. This category also impacted on core inflation, which increased 
markedly from 4,7 per cent in January to 5,3 per cent in February. Petrol prices 
also contributed to the upward trend having increased by 11,9 per cent. Food 
price inflation measured 6,3 per cent, down from a recent high of 7,5 per cent in 
November 2012, and its contribution to overall inflation declined from 1,0 
percentage points to 0,9 percentage points. Administered prices increased by 8,9 
 3 
per cent, and by 7,5 per cent excluding petrol, year-on-year. The producer price 
inflation for final manufactured goods measured 5,8 per cent in January1. 
  
The inflation forecast of the Bank reflects a slight deterioration in the inflation 
outlook for 2013 compared with the previous forecast. The forecasts incorporate 
the new CPI weights and rebasing announced by Statistics South Africa, as well 
as the lower electricity price increase of 8 per cent granted to Eskom by Nersa. 
Inflation is now expected to average 5,9 per cent in 2013 and 5,3 per cent in 
2014, compared with the previous forecasts of 5,8 per cent and 5,2 per cent for 
these respective years. Inflation is expected to breach temporarily the upper end 
of the target range in the third quarter of 2013, when it is expected to average 6,3 
per cent, and then to moderate gradually to 5,2 per cent in the final quarter of 
2014. This deterioration is largely due to the depreciation of the rand and higher 
petrol prices, which more than offset the impact of the lower electricity price 
increases and a lower starting point.  
 
The forecast of core inflation is more or less unchanged for 2013 but higher for 
2014, yet still indicates the continued absence of significant demand pressures. 
This measure is expected to peak at 5,1 per cent in the second quarter of 2014, 
and to average 4,8 per cent and 4,9 per cent in 2013 and 2014, respectively. This 
                                                 1 Statistics South Africa has adopted a “stages-of-production” concept for the PPI and no longer produces one aggregated series. The five producer price series are PPI for final manufactured goods; intermediate manufactured goods; electricity and water; mining; and agriculture, forestry and fishing. The PPI for final manufactured goods is regarded as best representing the effects of price changes through the five stages of production. 
 4 
forecast is likely to be adjusted upwards in the light of the increase in medical 
insurance costs announced earlier today.  
 
Inflation expectations as reflected in the Reuters survey of analysts conducted in 
February 2013 have remained more or less unchanged since December. 
Expectations remained anchored within the target range but close to the upper 
end, and, as with the Bank’s forecast, the peak is expected in the third quarter of 
2013.  
 
The global economic outlook presents a mixed picture following a disappointing 
fourth quarter in most of the advanced economies. Recent data from the United 
States indicate positive trends in the labour market and household consumption 
expenditure due in part to positive wealth effects from the housing and equity 
markets. However, uncertainty about the possible negative impulse from fiscal 
tightening continues amid political differences over fiscal policy. Economic growth 
is still expected to remain below trend in 2013.  
 
The outlook for some of South Africa’s other main advanced-economy trading 
partners is less positive. The Eurozone remains in recession, and is not expected 
to recover before mid-2013 at the earliest. The tail risks from a sovereign debt 
crisis appeared to have subsided, but the uncertainty created by the inconclusive 
Italian general election, and the crisis in Cyprus, have renewed concerns about 
 5 
the stability of the region. The outlook for the UK economy remains subdued 
against the backdrop of continued fiscal austerity. 
 
Growth prospects in the Asian economies are more positive. The Japanese 
economy is expected to be bolstered by positive consumer sentiment in response 
to fiscal and monetary stimuli, but the response on the capital expenditure side is 
still cautious. Nevertheless an improved growth performance is expected, 
particularly given the 18 per cent depreciation of the yen against the US dollar 
since October 2012. Growth in China is expected to be sustained at relatively 
robust levels as fixed investment expenditure remains strong despite a 
moderation in consumption expenditure growth. Growth in other emerging 
markets remains positive. 
 
These trends suggest that monetary policy in the advanced economies will 
remain accommodative for some time despite recent fears in the financial 
markets of an early reversal of quantitative easing in the US.  The relatively weak 
growth outlook in the advanced economies has contributed to the subdued global 
inflation environment.   
 
The exchange rate of the rand continues to pose the main upside risk to the 
inflation outlook. Since the beginning of the year, the rand has depreciated by 8,4 
per cent against the US dollar and fluctuated within a range of R8,45 and R9,26. 
However, given the significant realignment of global currencies, and particularly 
 6 
the depreciation of the Japanese yen and the pound sterling against the US 
dollar, the trade weighted depreciation since the beginning of the year was more 
moderate at 5,6 per cent.  
 
Domestic factors contributing to the recent rand depreciation include continued 
work stoppages in parts of the mining sector, which also have the potential to 
disrupt electricity supplies, and the further widening of the deficit on the current 
account of the balance of payments, which measured 6,3 per cent in 2012. Some 
narrowing of the deficit is expected during the course of the year in response to 
the depreciation, although the degree of response will be constrained by weak 
demand from advanced economies as well as strong infrastructure-related import 
demands. Mining export growth will also be dependent on the resolution of labour 
market issues with a resumption of full production, and on the extent of possible 
shaft closures. 
  
Equity and bond flows to emerging economies have generally moderated in the 
past few months, making for a more challenging global environment for financing 
the deficit.  Inflows into South African bond and equity markets have, however, 
been sustained, and year-to-date non-resident net purchases of equities and 
government bonds have totaled R6,1 bn and R11,3 bn respectively. These flows 
have, however, been volatile, and the growing proportion of bonds owned by 
non-residents, currently around 37 per cent of the total outstanding stock of debt 
could constrain the pace of inflows.  
 7 
 
The rand is likely to remain sensitive to both domestic and global developments.  
The exchange rate is expected to remain volatile and subject to overshooting, 
and further sustained depreciation would increase the upside risk to the inflation 
outlook. The Reuters Econometer survey conducted in February shows that most 
analysts still expect the rand to appreciate from current levels during the year, 
although the degree of dispersion is indicative of the uncertainty around these 
forecasts. According to this survey, the consensus forecast for the rand/US$ 
exchange rate at the end of 2013 is R8,61, with a range of forecasts between 
R9,19 and R7,80. 
 
Domestic growth prospects remain relatively subdued notwithstanding a better
than-expected fourth quarter GDP growth outcome and positive developments in 
the mining and manufacturing sectors in January.  The economy grew by 2,5 per 
cent in 2012, having recorded annualised growth of 2,1 per cent in the fourth 
quarter, despite a 9,3 per cent contraction in the mining sector. The moderate 
pace of recovery is expected to continue in 2013. The Bank’s forecast is for 
growth of 2,7 per cent this year, marginally up from the previous forecast of 2,6 
per cent, and 3,7 per cent in 2014, compared with a previous forecast of 3,8 per 
cent. The risks to these forecasts are assessed to be on the downside. 
 
The flat trajectory of the Bank’s leading indicator of economic activity is 
consistent with this forecast. Growth this year is therefore expected to remain 
 8 
below potential output growth of 3,5 per cent, and this is expected to result in a 
slight widening of the Bank’s revised estimate of the output gap which, at 2,0 per 
cent, reflects the continued subdued state of the economy.  
 
The mining sector recorded year-on-year growth of 7,3 per cent in January, with 
3-month-on-3-month growth of 5,4 per cent following four consecutive months of 
contraction. Neverthless the sector is expected to remain under pressure given 
the unsettled labour relations environment. The outlook for manufacturing 
appears to have improved, but this recovery is still very tentative. The sector 
grew at a year-on-year rate of 3,9 per cent in January, and by 1,8 per cent on a 
3-month-on-3-month basis. This was consistent with improvements in the Kagiso 
Purchasing Managers Index, which increased from 49,1 in January to 53,6 in 
February.  
 
Growth in gross fixed capital formation, which measured 5,7 per cent in 2012, 
has been on a moderate upward trend since 2009, driven mainly by investment 
growth of around 9 per cent by public corporations and general government. 
Private sector investment growth moderated from 4,6 per cent in 2011 to 3,9 per 
cent in 2012 due in part to excess capacity in manufacturing and electricity 
supply constraints. 
 
While household consumption expenditure has been the main driver of growth 
since 2010, its contribution to growth has been diminishing. The general absence 
 9 
of demand pressures in the economy is reflected in the continued moderation in 
the growth in real consumption expenditure by households, which grew by 3,5 
per cent in 2012  compared with 4,8 per cent in 2011. Nevertheless, growth in 
consumption of durable goods remained robust at 11 per cent, compared with 
demand for services which grew at only 1,8 per cent in 2012. Sales of new motor 
vehicles declined on  both a month-on-month and on a three-month-on-three
month basis in February. 
 
Retail trade sales in January appear to reflect this weakening trend, with a 3
month-on-3-month decline of 0,7 per cent, and a lower than expected year-on
year increase of 1,9 per cent. There are indications that consumption growth may 
moderate further in 2013 amid slower real income growth, higher inflation, 
elevated household debt levels, and a possible slow-down in credit extension to 
consumers. 
 
Twelve-month growth in banks’ total loans and advances to the private sector 
measured 8,9 per cent in January, following growth of 10,0 per cent in 
December. Loans and advances to the corporate sector grew by 7,5 per cent in 
January, and to the household sector by 9,9 per cent. Growth in general loans to 
households - mainly unsecured lending - moderated to 30,1 per cent following a 
recent peak growth of 39,3 per cent in June. General loans to households 
amounted to 8,3 per cent of total loans and advances, and 14,6 per cent of loans 
and advances to household. Growth in this category of lending is likely to be 
 10 
constrained by lower income growth and high household debt levels. Household 
debt to disposable income measured 75,8 per cent in the final quarter of 2012. 
Non-mortgage debt as a percentage of total household debt increased from 37 
per cent in the third quarter of 2009 to 46 per cent in the final quarter of 2012. 
 
The trend in wage settlements remains an upside risk to the inflation outlook, 
although recent data is somewhat contradictory. The minimum wage in the 
agricultural sector has been increased by 52,2 per cent, and indications from the 
Andrew Levy Employment Publications are that wage settlements in collective 
bargaining agreements picked up significantly from 6,8 per cent in the third 
quarter of 2012 to 8,2 per cent in the fourth quarter. According to Statistics South 
Africa, average salaries and wages per worker in the non-agricultural sector 
increased over four quarters by 7,0 per cent in the final quarter of 2012, down 
from 8,9 per cent in the previous quarter, while unit labour cost increases 
declined from 7,4 per cent to 5,7 per cent in the same period. 
  
The MPC remains concerned about the possible impact of excessively high wage 
increases on employment growth. Employment in the formal non-agricultural 
sector increased by 1,0 per cent during 2012, compared with annual employment 
growth of 1,6 per cent in 2011. This included employment growth of 0,2 per cent 
in the mining and quarrying industry and a 0,3 per cent contraction in the 
manufacturing sector. In the fourth quarter of 2012 mining sector employment 
increased by 1,000 employees, following a decline of 16,000 in the third quarter. 
 11 
Of concern is the seasonally adjusted annualised decline of 0,7 per cent in total 
non-agricultural employment during the fourth quarter of 2012. 
 
The recent national government budget tabled before parliament reflects a 
difficult balance between a commitment to medium-term fiscal consolidation and 
the need for counter-cyclical policy. The projected deficit of 5,7 per cent for the 
past fiscal year was wider than initially budgeted for, a result of lower revenue 
due to weaker economic growth. The fiscal deficit as a percentage of GDP is 
budgeted to be 5,1 per cent in the 2013/14 fiscal year, and to decline to 3,6 per 
cent by 2015/16. The government net debt/GDP ratio is expected to stabilise at 
around 40 per cent in 2015/16, well below the international benchmark for debt 
sustainability of around 60 per cent.  
 
There are indications that the pressures on inflation emanating from food prices 
may be moderating. Food price inflation at the consumer price level declined 
from a recent high of 7,5 per cent in November 2012 to 6,4 per cent in January 
and 6,3 per cent in February. A similar trend is evident at the producer price level 
where manufactured food inflation declined to 5,9 per cent in January, compared 
with a recent peak of 11,1 per cent in November 2012. Similarly, producer price 
inflation in agricultural products moderated from a recent high of 6,3 per cent in 
October 2012 to  3,5 per cent in January. Global agricultural commodity prices 
have declined on average by almost 20 per cent since their recent peak in 
 12 
August 2012, and expectations are for further moderation in the absence of 
adverse weather shocks. 
 
Administered prices continue to put upside pressure on inflation, although lower 
electricity price increases from the third quarter will dampen some of these 
pressures. The petrol price, which has increased by a cumulative R1,24 per litre 
since January 2013, remains an upside risk. Although global oil prices have 
declined over the past few weeks, resulting in an over-recovery of the petrol price 
so far this month, it is unlikely to be sufficient to offset the adverse exchange rate 
impacts and the fuel levy increases, and a further increase in the petrol price is 
likely in April. 
 
The MPC continues to assess the balance of risks to the inflation outlook to be 
on the upside, mainly due to the exchange rate and wage pressures.  These 
upside risks are mitigated in part by lower risk from food price inflation. 
Underlying inflation appears to be relatively contained, consistent with the 
moderating trend in consumption expenditure by households. 
 
The economic growth outlook is more or less unchanged from the previous 
meeting of the MPC, and risks to the outlook remain on the downside. The 
unresolved labour disputes in the mining sector pose a significant risk to the 
exchange rate and to economic growth through their negative impact on export 
revenues, employment growth and investor perceptions of South Africa. 
 13 
However, the depreciated exchange rate provides an opportunity for the 
manufacturing sector in particular to become more competitive despite the 
challenging export environment.  Ensuring that this increase in competitiveness is 
sustained will require improved productivity and the containment of wage and 
other cost pressures, which underlines the need to keep inflation under control. 
 
The MPC continues to assess the monetary policy stance to be appropriately 
accommodative given the persistence of the negative output gap. At the same 
time, further accommodation remains constrained by the upside risks to the 
inflation outlook. The MPC has therefore decided to keep the repurchase rate 
unchanged at 5,0 per cent per annum. The Committee will continue to apply 
monetary policy consistent with its  mandate of price stability within a flexible 
inflation targeting framework. 
 
 