Since the previous meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee, inflation has 
breached the upper end of the target band and is expected to remain outside the 
target for some time. This development was in line with the Bank’s inflation 
forecast, which is more or less unchanged since the previous meeting of the 
MPC. The exchange rate has appreciated somewhat since its lows in January in 
response to a more benign global monetary policy environment, moderating 
some of the near-term upside risks to inflation. Nevertheless, risks to the inflation 
outlook remain skewed to the upside. 
 
Despite a more favourable global growth environment, the domestic economic 
growth outlook has deteriorated markedly. There is still no end in sight to the 
protracted strike in the platinum sector, and the economic and social costs are 
escalating and are potentially devastating. Both the mining and manufacturing 
2 
 
sectors appear to have contracted in the first quarter, with electricity supply 
constraints adding to the weak outlook. Against this backdrop, monetary policy 
faces an increasingly challenging scenario.  
 
The year-on-year inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) 
for all urban areas measured 6,0 per cent and 6,1 per cent in March and April 
2014 respectively, up from 5,9 per cent in February.  Food and non-alcoholic 
beverage price inflation accelerated significantly, measuring 7,0 per cent and 7,8 
per cent in the past two months, compared with a recent low of 3,5 per cent in 
December. The contribution of this category to headline inflation was 1,2 
percentage points in April compared with 0,8 percentage points in February. The 
categories of food, housing utilities and transport together accounted for 3,7 
percentage points of the inflation outcome in April. Core inflation, which excludes 
food, petrol and electricity, measured 5,5  per cent in March and April after six 
consecutive months at 5,3 per cent. Administered price inflation excluding petrol 
continued its gradual decline, measuring 6,5 per cent in April, from 6,7 per cent in 
March. The headline producer price inflation for final manufactured goods 
measured 8,2 per cent in March, compared with 7,7 per cent in February, driven 
mainly by food prices, and is indicative of further upside pressures on CPI 
inflation in the near term. 
  
The Bank’s forecast of headline inflation changed marginally since the previous 
meeting. Inflation is expected to average 6,2 per cent in 2014, compared with 6,3 
3 
 
per cent previously, with the peak of 6,5 per cent (previously 6,6 per cent) 
expected in the fourth quarter. The forecast average inflation for 2015 remained 
unchanged at 5,8 per cent. The forecast horizon has been extended and inflation 
is expected to average 5,5 per cent in 2016, and 5,4 per cent in the final quarter 
of that year. Inflation is still expected to remain outside the target band from the 
second quarter of 2014 until the second quarter of 2015.  
 
The outlook for core inflation is also largely unchanged. This measure is 
expected to average 5,6 per cent  and 5,7 per cent in 2014 and 2015 
respectively, compared with the previous forecast of 5,6 per cent for both years, 
moderating to 5,5 per cent in 2016. The upward pressure is assessed to be a 
response to the lagged effects of the exchange rate depreciation rather than 
evidence of strong domestic demand pressures.  The MPC still sees the risks to 
the inflation forecast to be skewed to the upside, and remains concerned that the 
current low level of pass-through may not persist. 
 
The Reuters survey of inflation expectations of economic analysts conducted in 
May is more or less unchanged since the previous survey. Inflation is expected to 
average 6,3 per cent in the second quarter, and 6,2 per cent in the final two 
quarters of this year, before returning to within the target at an average of 5,8 per 
cent in the first quarter of 2015. Annual inflation is expected to average 6,2 per 
cent in 2014, and 5,6 per cent and 5,4 per cent in the subsequent two years 
respectively, somewhat lower than the Bank’s forecast. 
4 
 
 
The global economic outlook remains mixed. Growth in the US stalled in the first 
quarter as a consequence of the severe weather conditions, while retail sales in 
April were below expectations. Despite downside risk to growth from the housing 
market, the recovery is expected to remain on track, although at a lower rate than 
that forecast earlier in the year. While the Fed expects growth of between 2,8 and 
3,0 per cent for 2014,  the market consensus is closer to 2,5 per cent. The UK 
economic recovery also appears to be resilient, despite some slack in the 
economy. By contrast, the Eurozone continues to lag, following a lower-than
expected annualised growth rate of around 0,8 per cent in the first quarter.  
The annualised growth rate of 5,9 per cent recorded by the Japanese economy in 
the first quarter of this year is not expected to be sustained as higher 
consumption taxes take effect, and consensus forecasts are for annual growth of 
around 1,5 per cent. The Chinese economy grew at an annualised rate of 5,8 per 
cent in the first quarter of 2014 amid weakening trends in industrial production 
and retail sales. Although an annual growth rate of between 7,0 - 7,5 per cent is 
still generally expected, there are concerns that the loss of momentum in the 
property market and declining credit growth could pose downside risks to growth.  
 
The shift in global growth dynamics toward the advanced economies has been 
reinforced with a number of emerging markets facing a more challenging outlook. 
Low growth is expected in a number of the larger economies, including Brazil, 
Russia, Argentina, Turkey and Thailand, but some analysts have revised 
5 
 
upwards their growth forecasts for India. More positively, growth in sub-Saharan 
Africa is expected to average 5,4 per cent, but this is vulnerable to weaker 
commodity prices in the event of slower growth in China. 
 
Global inflation remains benign amid relatively stable food and energy price 
trends. Financial markets appear to have priced in continued steady tapering of 
quantitative easing in the US, and recent guidance from the Fed appears to have 
reduced the degree of volatility and uncertainty in financial markets regarding the 
pace and timing of monetary policy normalisation. Policy rates look set to 
increase at a moderate pace in the US and UK during 2015, while the possibility 
exists of further easing in Japan and the Eurozone, where the risk of deflation 
persists. Since the previous meeting of the MPC, monetary policy has been 
tightened in New Zealand, Brazil and Russia in response to inflation pressures or 
exchange rate concerns, but eased slightly in Hungary. 
 
With global financial markets pricing in a slower pace of US policy normalisation, 
global risk appetite has improved. Apart from sizeable outflows from Russia in 
the wake of the crisis in the Ukraine, capital flows to emerging markets have 
resumed, or outflows slowed, resulting in generally appreciating EM currencies 
and declining long bond yields. This improved sentiment has also impacted on 
the rand exchange rate, which appreciated by 3,3 per cent against the dollar and 
by 3,1 per cent on a trade-weighted basis since the previous meeting of the 
6 
 
MPC. During this period the rand traded in a range of between around R10,70 
and R10,29 against the US dollar.  
 
Portfolio flows to South Africa have been in line with general global trends. 
Following cumulative net sales of South African government bonds and equities 
by non-residents of R71 bn from November 2013 to the end of January 2014, net 
purchases of bonds and equities since the beginning of February have totaled 
R8,3  bn and R29,9 bn respectively. Year-to-date net inflows into bonds and 
equities total R7,6 bn. 
 
While recent exchange rate developments have afforded some near-term respite 
from further inflation risks from the exchange rate, the MPC is mindful of the 
sensitivity of the rand to both global and domestic factors. 
The rand is expected to remain vulnerable to changing global perceptions of US 
monetary policy and associated capital flows. However, while the recent 
appreciation is more a reflection of changing global risk perceptions rather than a 
specific re-assessment of South African fundamentals, domestic factors have 
also impacted on the rand. The exchange rate is likely to remain sensitive to 
domestic factors, including developments in the current account of the balance of 
payments and perceptions of its sustainability. In particular, the ongoing strike in 
the platinum sector is expected to begin to have a significant negative impact on 
exports, now that inventories are reaching low levels, and a further extension of 
the strike could impede the required current account adjustment process.  
7 
 
 
The domestic economic growth outlook has deteriorated markedly, with the 
reversal of a number of the tentative positive signs observed at the beginning of 
the year. The Bank’s forecast for economic growth for 2014 has been revised 
down from 2,6 per cent at the previous meeting to 2,1 per cent, implying a further 
widening of the negative output gap. The forecast for 2015 remains unchanged at 
3,1 per cent, and growth in 2016 is expected to average 3,4 per cent. However, 
the risks to these forecasts are increasingly to the downside against the renewed 
possibility of electricity load-shedding, among other factors. The Bank’s leading 
indicator of economic activity declined marginally in February, and the sustained 
sideways movement confirms the subdued outlook, amid weak business 
confidence. The RMB/BER business confidence index declined by two index 
points to 41 index points in the first quarter of 2014. 
 
The first quarter growth outcome was negatively affected by contractions in both 
the mining and manufacturing sectors. In the first quarter of 2014 the physical 
volume of mining production declined by 6,8 per cent (not annualised) when 
compared with the previous quarter. This decline was not confined to the 
platinum group metals, with production declining in seven of the twelve mining 
sub-components and expectations are for this negative trend to continue.  
 
The physical volume of manufacturing production declined by 1,6 per cent (not 
annualised) in the first quarter of the year. The contraction was also broad based 
8 
 
and the outlook for the sector remains subdued as reflected in the marked 
decline in the Kagiso PMI to 47,4 index points in April. This follows two 
consecutive months when the index was above 50 points. The new sales orders 
component of the PMI remained well below 50 for the second consecutive month.  
There appears to be continued underutilisation of manufacturing production 
capacity, particularly with respect to durable goods production. 
 
The favourable trend in the real value of building plans passed during the past 
two years has been maintained in keeping with rising levels of building 
confidence.  The real value of building plans passed increased by 13,6 per cent 
on the 3-month-to-3-month basis in March 2014, and by 5,9 per cent on a year
on-year basis. 
 
The unemployment rate remained elevated at 25,2 per cent in the first quarter of 
2014 in a declining growth environment. This follows a decline in employment in 
the first quarter of 2014 of 122,000 jobs, although on a seasonally adjusted basis 
the decrease was 32,000.  
 
Consumption expenditure by households is expected to remain constrained in 
the face of continued weakness in credit extension, rising inflation, high 
consumer indebtedness, as well as the knock-on effects of the mining strike, 
where the cumulative loss of wages is estimated to have exceeded R8 billion. 
Real retail sales grew by 0,6 per cent on a quarter-to-quarter basis in the first 
9 
 
quarter of this year, having declined in March by 1,4 per cent on a month-to
month basis. New vehicle sales declined by 0,7 per cent on a 3-month-to-3
month basis in April, and by over 10 per cent on a year-on-year basis while 
NAAMSA expects new vehicle sales to contract over the year. Although the 
FNB/BER consumer confidence index improved marginally in the first quarter of 
2014, it remained at a low level of -6. 
  
Growth in bank credit extension to households continued to moderate, while that 
to companies has remained relatively robust. The twelve month growth in total 
loans and advances to the private sector measured 8,2 per cent in March 2014, 
driven by a 12,7 per cent increase in credit extension to companies, related in 
part to the awarding of a new round of renewable energy contracts.  By contrast, 
growth in credit extension to households moderated further to 4,8 per cent, as 
unsecured lending continued its downward trend. Growth over twelve months in 
general loans to households, mainly made up of unsecured lending, measured 
3,5 per cent in March, the lowest rate of growth since 2005. Growth in mortgage 
advances to households remained below 3 per cent, in line with the relatively 
subdued volume growth in the housing market. While growth in instalment sale 
and leasing finance recorded annual growth of 10,1 per cent in March, it is on a 
declining trend, particularly with respect to households. These trends in credit 
extension are expected to remain a constraint on consumption expenditure 
growth. 
  
10 
 
The trend in wage settlements is more or less unchanged. According to Andrew 
Levy Employment Publications, the overall average wage settlement rate in 
collective bargaining agreements was unchanged from the previous year, at 7,9 
per cent in the first quarter of 2014. However the main wage negotiations are yet 
to be completed, in particular the re-negotiation of a new multi-year agreement in 
the Steel and Engineering Bargaining Council. The outcome of this, as well as 
the impasse in the platinum sector, could have an important bearing on the 
general trend of wage settlements. 
 
Food prices remain a risk to the inflation outlook, although the risk may have 
moderated somewhat following the sharp reversal in domestic maize prices in 
recent weeks. Having reached a peak of almost R3,800 per ton in March, maize 
prices declined in May to around R2,000 per ton, and an 8 per cent decline over 
the year.  This was in response to an upward revision of the domestic maize crop 
forecast, now expected to be 11 per cent higher than last year, which has 
resulted in a move from import to export parity prices. This development, if 
sustained, could help ameliorate the considerable pipeline pressures that have 
been evident in the producer price index since the beginning of the year.  Final 
manufactured producer food price inflation accelerated to 9,1 per cent in March 
and further pressures are evident in the agricultural producer price inflation for 
cereals which measured 26,5 per cent in March, although this is expected to 
moderate in response to lower spot prices.  
 
11 
 
The international oil price has remained within the range of US$105-US$111 for 
some time. The domestic price of petrol has benefited from the stronger trend in 
the exchange rate over the past weeks. In May the price of 95 octane petrol 
declined by 15 cents per litre, following a 7 cent per litre increase in April, and, 
should current trends continue, a further reduction can be expected in June. 
 
The MPC continues to face the difficult dilemma of dealing with upside risks to 
inflation and a deteriorating domestic economic growth outlook. Although the 
breach of the upper end of the inflation target band was in line with the Bank’s 
forecast, the risks to the forecast remain on the upside. The policy dilemma is 
increased by the fact that inflation is seen to be driven primarily by supply side 
factors, while demand conditions in the economy remain subdued. 
 
Although the immediate pressures from the exchange rate are lower than was 
the case earlier in the year, the exchange rate remains a significant source of 
upside risk to the forecast. The respite from the stronger exchange rate could be 
temporary and respond quickly to changes in both domestic and external 
conditions. Although the pass-through from the exchange rate to inflation is still 
relatively low, there are indications of some acceleration. In addition, food prices 
are expected to add further upside impetus to inflation in the near term, but this 
risk may have moderated to some extent given the sharp decline in the maize 
prices and low global food inflation. 
 
12 
 
As indicated earlier, the Bank’s economic growth forecast for 2014 has been 
revised down significantly to 2,1 per cent, and the first quarter growth outcome is 
anticipated to be the lowest quarterly growth rate since the recession in 2009. 
Although growth in the second quarter is expected to improve somewhat, the 
risks to the 2014 growth forecast are strongly on the downside, with 
developments in the mining sector an ongoing cause for concern. The demand 
side of the economy is also weakening: household consumption expenditure 
growth continues to moderate amid slower credit extension to households, high 
levels of consumer debt levels and moderate job growth. However, the weak 
state of the economy cannot be resolved through monetary policy actions alone.  
 
The committee continues to hold the view that we are in a rising interest rate 
cycle, and interest rates will have to be normalised in due course. We embarked 
on this process with our first move in January 2014. At this stage the pace and 
timing of normalisation in the advanced economies appears to have been pushed 
out further and may be more moderate than previously believed. We are also 
aware that this can change very quickly.  
 
Accordingly, the committee decided to keep the repurchase rate unchanged at 
5,5 per cent per annum at this stage. 
 
Future actions will be data dependent and determined by developments in the 
inflation outlook and inflation expectations. Inflation is currently at uncomfortable 
13 
 
levels and a marked deterioration in the outlook may require action that we will 
not hesitate to take. The MPC reiterates that a rising interest rate cycle does not 
mean that rates will be raised at each meeting, or by the same amount each 
time.