The challenges facing monetary policy have persisted, and, as expected, the 
downward trend in inflation which was mainly attributable to the impact of lower oil 
prices, has reversed. Headline inflation is expected to breach temporarily the upper 
end of the target range early next year, and thereafter remains uncomfortably close 
to the upper end of the target band for most of the forecast period. The upside risks 
have increased, mainly due to further possible electricity price increases. The 
exchange rate also continues to impart an upside risk to inflation as uncertainty 
regarding impending US monetary policy continues. Domestic demand, however, 
remains subdued while electricity constraints continue to weigh on output growth and 
general consumer and business confidence. 
 
The year-on-year inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) for all 
urban areas measured 4,0 per cent and 4,5 per cent in March and April respectively. 
The petrol price increase of R1,56 per litre in April resulted in a decline in the rate of 
disinflation from the transport category, from -5,0 per cent in March to -1,1 per cent 
2 
 
in April, while food price inflation moderated further.  The main contributions to the 
April headline rate came from the categories of food and non-alcoholic beverages, 
housing and utilities, and miscellaneous goods and services, which together 
accounted for 3,2 percentage points of the outcome. Core inflation, which excludes 
food, petrol and electricity, moderated from 5,7 per cent in March to 5,6 per cent in 
April.  
 
Producer price inflation for final manufactured goods appears to have reached a low 
point in February at 2,6 per cent, following the 3,1 per cent outcome in March, higher 
than market consensus. While food price inflation moderated,  the main upside 
contribution came from coal and petroleum products where disinflation slowed. The 
recent increase in international oil prices and higher agricultural crop prices, along 
with further electricity price increases from mid-year are likely to sustain the upward 
momentum.   
 
The inflation forecast of the Bank has changed since the previous meeting of the 
MPC. Inflation is now expected to average 4,9 per cent in 2015, with a first quarter 
low of 4,1 per cent. A temporary breach of the upper end of the inflation target band 
is still expected during the first quarter of 2016, to peak at 6,8 per cent, and to 
decline to 6,0 per cent by the second quarter of that year. An average inflation rate of 
6,1 per cent is forecast for the year. The forecast period has now been extended to 
the end of 2017, with an average inflation rate of 5,7 per cent expected for the year, 
and 5,6 per cent in the final quarter.  
 
3 
 
The forecast for core inflation has also increased marginally, to 5,6 per cent in 2015, 
and to 5,4 per cent in 2016. Core inflation is expected to average 5,2 per cent in 
2017, with a final quarter average of 5,1 per cent. Much of the persistence of core 
inflation at these levels is attributed to high levels of wage growth, currency 
depreciation and inflation expectations entrenched at the upper end of the target 
range.  
 
The headline inflation forecast assumes electricity price increases of 13,0 per cent 
from July 2015 and July 2016 in line with the original multi-year price determination 
process of Nersa. However, the application by Eskom for a further 12,6 per cent 
increase from 1 July 2015 will be decided at the end of June. Given the uncertainty 
regarding this decision, both in terms of quantum and timing of implementation, it 
has not been incorporated into the forecast, but poses a significant upside risk. 
Should Nersa fully accede to the Eskom request, a higher peak of headline inflation 
as well as a more extended breach of the target can be expected. The direct and 
indirect effects of such an increase could increase average inflation by around 0,5 
percentage points over a year. 
 
The BER inflation expectations survey for the second quarter of 2015 will only be 
released in June. Median inflation expectations as reflected in the Reuters 
Econometer poll, at 4,9 per cent and 5,9 per cent for 2015 and 2016, are similar to 
the Bank’s forecast, although there is a fairly wide dispersion between respondents. 
The break-even inflation rates, as reflected in the yield differential between 
conventional bonds and inflation-linked bonds, have been more volatile, and are 
4 
 
above the upper end of the target range over all maturities, having reversed their 
earlier declines this year. 
 
The outlook for the global economy is broadly unchanged since the previous meeting 
of the MPC. The US growth forecast for 2015 has been revised down by about half a 
percentage point following the broad-based first quarter estimate of 0,2 per cent, 
although this deterioration is generally believed to be temporary. Growth of around 
3,0 per cent is now expected in 2015, still above estimated potential. Eurozone 
growth has surprised on the upside, and while still relatively subdued at an expected 
1,5 per cent for 2015, there are indications that the region is responding to the ECB 
monetary stimulus.  Any possible fall-out from the debt crisis in Greece remains 
uncertain. Japan is expected to growth by just below one per cent this year. 
 
Growth in some of the larger emerging markets remains weak. Negative growth is 
being experienced in Brazil and Russia, and although the Chinese economy is still 
slowing, with first quarter growth of around 5,3 per cent, a hard landing is not 
expected amid further monetary policy easing. By contrast, the Indian economy has 
been performing strongly, partly in response to policy reforms. While growth in Africa 
has remained relatively robust, downside risks have emerged in some of the oil and 
commodity-producing countries. 
 
Global inflation remains benign, but the partial recovery in the international oil price 
has ameliorated the deflationary risks in some of the advanced economies in 
particular. Higher, but still low, inflation expectations contributed to a sharp rise in 
bond yields in some of the advanced economies, with spillovers to other bond 
5 
 
markets. However, most central banks remain in loosening mode, with further 
reductions in policy interest rates in a number of countries since the previous 
meeting of the MPC. A notable exception has been Brazil, where monetary policy 
was tightened for the third time this year. 
 
Global financial markets remain focused on the timing of US monetary policy 
tightening. Low inflation and the weaker first quarter growth outcome have pushed 
out expectations regarding the starting date, but financial markets generally expect 
the first move to be during 2015, most likely in September, followed by a gradual 
data dependent tightening cycle. Continued financial market volatility is likely to 
ensue with each relevant data release.  
 
The uncertainty regarding US growth prospects contributed to a weakening of the 
dollar against most currencies in recent weeks. Since the previous meeting of the 
MPC the rand traded in a relatively narrow band of between R11,80 and R12,20 
against the US dollar, and is currently almost unchanged since then. However, in line 
with dollar weakening, the rand has depreciated by 0,6 per cent against the euro and 
by 4,0 per cent against the pound sterling. On a trade-weighted basis, the rand has 
depreciated by 0,3 per cent. 
 
The rand continues to be vulnerable to the ebbs and flows of global risk perceptions 
and associated capital flows, particularly in response to anticipated changes to US 
monetary policy. At the same time, there is a great deal of uncertainty regarding the 
extent to which US monetary policy normalisation has been priced into the rand. 
However, past patterns suggest that some further pressure is likely on the exchange 
6 
 
rate and long bond yields as the start of the US tightening cycle becomes more 
certain. Reflecting this uncertainty, non-resident bond and equity flows have been 
quite volatile. According to JSE data, non-residents have been net buyers of bonds 
and equities to the value of around R15 billion since the beginning of this year. 
 
The rand therefore remains an upside risk to the inflation outlook, although the 
degree of upside risk is tempered somewhat by the continued relatively low level of 
pass-through to consumer price inflation. The Bank estimates that the actual pass
through could be about half of what is currently implied in the forecast model, but it is 
still uncertain as to whether this reflects a permanent change or a temporary 
phenomenon which can reverse rapidly. 
 
The domestic growth outlook remains weak, amid continued electricity supply 
constraints and low and declining levels of business and consumer confidence. The 
Bank’s forecast for GDP growth is marginally down from the previous forecast: 
growth is expected to average 2,1 per cent and 2,2 per cent in 2015 and 2016, and 
to increase to 2,7 per cent in 2017. Growth for the next two years therefore is 
expected to be more or less in line with our estimate of short-term potential output 
growth of between 2,0 and 2,5 per cent. It also suggests that the negative output 
gap, currently estimated at around 1,5 per cent, is likely to persist. This forecast 
makes an assumption regarding the persistence of electricity shortages, which are 
expected to be relieved somewhat only in 2017. However, the risks to growth are 
assessed to be on the downside. The moderate decline in the Bank’s composite 
leading business cycle indicator also suggests a continuation of the sluggish growth 
outlook.  
7 
 
 
Despite a strong performance by the mining sector in March, first quarter growth is 
expected to be subdued and much lower than the 4,1 per cent measured in the 
fourth quarter of 2014. According to Statistics South Africa, the physical volume of 
mining output increased at a quarter-to-quarter rate of 1,9 per cent in the first 
quarter. Platinum group metals output was particularly strong in March with a month
on-month increase of 26,6 per cent.  By contrast, manufacturing output appears to 
have contracted by about 0,6 per cent in the quarter, consistent with the continued 
decline in the Kagiso PMI, down to 45,4 index points in April, and the slight decline in 
capacity utilisation in the manufacturing sector. The real value of building plans 
passed declined for a fourth successive month in February, in line with a weaker 
FNB/BER Building Confidence index in the first quarter of the year. 
 
Consumption expenditure by households is expected to remain relatively subdued, 
as higher personal tax rates take effect and the benefits of lower petrol prices 
dissipate. There are mixed signals from the retail trade sales which rebounded 
strongly in February but then contracted in March on a month-on-month basis. A 
quarterly growth rate of 0,9 per cent was recorded in the first quarter of 2015. Growth 
in expenditure on durable goods in particular is expected to decline, as reflected in 
the sluggish new vehicle sales, which decreased further in April. The FNB/BER 
consumer confidence index declined sharply in the first quarter of 2015, signalling 
modest growth in consumption expenditure going forward. 
 
Subdued levels of household consumption expenditure are reflected in credit 
extension by banks to households, where the divergence between households and 
8 
 
corporates continues. Growth in credit extension to the corporate sector was 13,9 
per cent in March 2015, compared with 3,6 per cent to households. The latter is 
reflective of continued weak growth across all the main categories of credit, 
influenced by both supply and demand factors. These trends are likely to be 
reinforced further by the implementation of affordability assessment regulations as 
part of revisions to the National Credit Regulations in March. The impending 
changes in the Basel III regulatory requirements are also contributing to relatively 
tight credit conditions. At the same time, weak employment growth, high debt levels 
and continued household deleveraging, as well as expectations of higher interest 
rates may have impacted on the demand for credit. 
  
Trends in remuneration growth remain a concern to the MPC. Average wage and 
salary growth has been in excess of inflation for some time, imparting some degree 
of automatic indexation to wage settlements, and therefore maintaining higher levels 
of inflation. In the fourth quarter of 2014, year-on-year growth in nominal 
remuneration per worker in the non-agricultural formal sector increased by 7,7 per 
cent. Once accounting for labour productivity growth of 1,3 per cent, unit labour costs 
showed an increase of 6,3 per cent, from 5,7 per cent in the previous quarter. 
According to Andrew Levy Employment publications, the average wage settlement 
rate in collective bargaining agreements measured 7,9 per cent in the first quarter of 
2015. The public sector wage settlement appears to have been settled at an 
increase of 7 per cent, but the full impact on the total government wage bill is still 
unclear. Upside risks to inflation from wage pressures are still expected, with the 
unresolved settlements in the coal and gold mining sectors of particular concern. 
9 
 
While high wage settlements could underpin household consumption expenditure, 
this could be offset in part by inevitable reductions in employment. 
 
Food price inflation is expected to contribute to upside inflation pressures. This is 
despite the continued moderation of global food prices and a recent declining trend 
of food price inflation at the CPI level and lower meat price inflation at the producer 
price level. Food price inflation measured 5,0 per cent in April following eight 
successive months of moderation. Similarly, final manufactured food producer price 
inflation moderated to 5,8 per cent in March. However, domestic drought conditions 
have resulted in a need to import yellow maize, contributing to maize prices rising 
close to import parity levels. These pressures, along with the weaker exchange rate, 
are expected to reverse the favourable trend in food price inflation by the second half 
of this year. 
 
The international oil price appears to have stabilised in the US$60-US$70 per barrel 
range, as capital expenditure plans have been scaled back following the collapse of 
prices in the later part of last year. Since the previous meeting of the MPC, Brent 
crude oil prices have increased by about US$10 per barrel. Domestic petrol prices 
remained unchanged in May, but a further increase of around 50 cents per litre, 
should current trends persist, is likely in June, attributable mainly to higher 
international product prices. 
  
  
10 
 
Although the upward revision of the inflation forecast was relatively small, the 
persistence of medium term inflation at elevated levels and the deteriorating risks to 
the outlook are an increasing concern to the MPC. While currently the breach is 
expected to be temporary, the longer term trajectory is close to the upper end of the 
target range, and the upside risks make this trajectory vulnerable to any significant 
changes in inflation pressures.   
The main risks to the outlook remain electricity tariff increases, the exchange rate 
and wage settlements. Significant additional electricity tariff increases are likely to 
cause inflation to diverge significantly from the target range for a more extended 
period than our baseline forecast suggests. The rand remains vulnerable to global 
market reaction to US policy normalisation, particularly in the context of South 
Africa’s twin deficits. Any significant weakening of the exchange rate in reaction to 
US monetary policy tightening could cause inflation to diverge even further from 
target, and set in motion an exchange rate-inflation spiral.  Furthermore, the 
possibility of a wage-price spiral, should settlements well in excess of inflation 
become an economy-wide norm, also poses a risk to the outlook. 
 
The MPC recognises that domestic inflation is not driven by demand factors that are 
more easily dealt with through monetary policy responses. Household consumption 
expenditure remains relatively subdued. While monetary policy should generally look 
through supply side shocks, such as large electricity tariff increases and oil price 
changes, we have to be mindful of the second-round effects of such shocks. In 
particular, we need to monitor closely the possible impact on inflation expectations 
11 
 
which remain uncomfortably close to the upper end of the target range over the 
longer term. 
Growth remains fragile, constrained by electricity shortages and low business 
confidence and the risk to the outlook remain on the downside. But this cannot be 
solved by monetary policy alone. Monetary policy action will need to achieve a fine 
balance between achieving our primary mandate of price stability and not 
undermining growth unduly.  
The MPC has decided to keep the repurchase rate unchanged at this meeting. Four 
members of the committee favoured an unchanged stance while two favoured a 25 
basis point increase. The deteriorating inflation outlook suggests that this unchanged 
stance cannot be maintained indefinitely. The MPC will continue to closely monitor 
the evolution of inflation expectations and other factors that could undermine the 
longer term inflation outlook and stands ready to act when appropriate. 
From the next meeting in July the Bank will take further steps to increase 
transparency by publishing the assumptions underlying the Bank’s forecast with the 
MPC statement.  
 