South Africa’s inflation and growth dynamics continue to highlight the policy dilemma 
facing monetary policy. Although headline CPI inflation has moderated since 
February, the respite is expected to be temporary, as food and petrol price pressures 
continue to intensify. The recovery in the rand exchange rate in April also proved to 
be short-lived, as both domestic and external factors weighed on the currency. At the 
same time, domestic economic growth continues to disappoint. While there are signs 
that the economy may be reaching the low point in the growth cycle, the recovery is 
expected to be slow with downside risks. Global economic growth and financial 
market conditions have stabilised somewhat since the previous MPC meeting, but a 
high degree of risk and uncertainty persists. 
The year-on-year inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) for all 
urban areas has moderated after reaching a recent high of 7,0 per cent in February. 
In March and April, CPI inflation measured 6,3 per cent and 6,2 per cent. Food price 
pressures continued unabated, with food and non-alcoholic beverages inflation 
accelerating to 11,0 per cent in April, up from 9,5 per cent previously. Goods price 
inflation moderated from 6,9 per cent to 6,7 per cent, while services price inflation 
2 
 
was unchanged at 5,7 per cent. The Bank’s measure of core inflation, which 
excludes food, fuel and electricity measured 5,5 per cent, up from 5,4 per cent in 
March. While the impact of the weaker exchange rate remains relatively low, there 
are indications of increased pass-through in some categories, particularly new motor 
vehicles and appliances. 
Producer price inflation for final manufactured goods moderated significantly from 
8,1 per cent in February to 7,1 per cent in March, mainly as a result of a sharp fall in 
fuel prices. Manufactured food product price inflation accelerated to 10,5 per cent, 
with the category of food, beverages and tobacco products contributing 3,1 
percentage points to the March outcome. Agricultural prices increased by 23,1 per 
cent in March, with cereal and other crop prices increasing by 50,0 per cent year-on
year. 
The latest inflation forecast of the Bank shows a moderate near-term deterioration 
compared with the previous forecast, but there is some improvement in the medium
term outlook. The breach of the upper end of the target range, while still protracted, 
is now slightly shorter, with inflation expected to fall within the range during the third 
quarter of 2017. Inflation is now expected to average 6,7 per cent in 2016 compared 
with 6,6 per cent previously. In 2017 and 2018 inflation is expected to average 6,2 
per cent and 5,4 per cent, marginally down from the previous forecast. The expected 
peak, at 7,3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2016, is unchanged. The downward 
revisions are due in part to the higher interest rate assumption, a slightly less 
depreciated exchange rate assumption, a wider output gap and a lower electricity 
price assumption. These pressures are counteracted to some extent by a higher 
3 
 
near-term food price forecast, and the impact of upward revisions to the international 
oil price assumptions. 
The forecast for core inflation is slightly improved, with a lower forecast for 2016 of 
5,9 per cent from 6,2 per cent previously. Forecasts for 2017 and 2018 are 
unchanged at 5,7 per cent and 5,2 per cent. Core inflation is expected to breach the 
upper end of the target range in the third quarter of 2016 for four consecutive 
quarters, with a peak of 6,2  per cent (previously 6,5 per cent) in the third and fourth 
quarters of 2016 and the first quarter of 2017. 
The BER survey of inflation expectations is only due for release in July. The median 
expectations of economic analysts, as reflected in the Reuters Econometer survey 
conducted in May are more or less unchanged compared with the previous survey, 
and are slightly higher than those of the Bank for 2016 and 2017. In the latest 
survey, the median expectations for 2016 and 2017 were 6,7 per cent and 6,4 per 
cent, with inflation expected to be within the target range in 2018, at an average of 
5,7 per cent. Bond market expectations implicit in the break-even inflation rates are 
more or less unchanged since the previous meeting and remain at fairly elevated 
levels. 
Global growth remains hesitant following a disappointing first quarter in the US and 
the UK in particular. While labour market conditions in the US have improved, low 
corporate profits have constrained investment. However, consensus forecasts show 
that a moderate improvement is expected in the coming months, but at a lower rate 
than previously expected. The outlook for the UK is clouded by the possibility of an 
exit from the EU, while the prospects for the Japanese economy remain uncertain. 
By contrast, the growth outlook in the euro area is more promising, driven by 
4 
 
improvements in Germany and France in particular, although there are concerns that 
the recent momentum may be fading. 
Divergent prospects are evident in the emerging markets. Russia and Brazil remain 
in recession, but there are signs of some stabilisation in China, as the economy 
appears to be responding to government policy initiatives. This improvement, along 
with a weaker US dollar, has resulted in some recovery in commodity prices, as well 
as a pick-up in portfolio flows to emerging markets. Of some concern is the 
persistent deterioration in growth forecasts for sub-Saharan Africa, which includes 
some of South Africa’s important trading partners. The region is now expected to 
underperform the global economy in 2016, for the first time in 16 years, as the 
effects of lower commodity prices and drought take their toll. 
Global inflation pressures remain benign, with low energy prices still having an 
impact, although this effect is likely to dissipate with the recent upward trend in oil 
prices. The latest data show declining prices in the euro area and Japan, and low 
inflation in the US and the UK. Inflation has remained relatively higher in a number of 
Latin American economies, particularly those experiencing currency depreciation. As 
a result of these trends, asynchronous monetary policies persist. While policies are 
generally accommodative amid subdued growth, particularly in many advanced 
economies, a number of emerging markets have maintained a tightening bias in 
response to inflation pressures. The US Fed is expected to continue with its slow 
pace of policy rate normalisation but there is a high degree of uncertainty regarding 
the timing of the next increase. 
The rand exchange rate has remained volatile, and following a few weeks of relative 
strength, has resumed a weakening path and continues to pose an upside risk to the 
5 
 
inflation outlook. Since the previous meeting of the MPC, the rand has traded in a 
range between R14,20 and R15,90 against the US dollar, and has depreciated by 
1,5 per cent against the dollar, by 0,9 per cent against the euro, and by 1,2 per cent 
on a trade-weighted basis. 
During this period the rand was initially favourably impacted by improved commodity 
prices, the narrower trade balance, and expectations of a slower pace of US Fed 
monetary policy tightening. However, these gains were reversed as global growth 
concerns resurfaced in early May, and other domestic factors, including the low 
growth outlook, concerns about a possible ratings downgrade and more recently 
heightened political uncertainty impacted adversely on the currency.   
Although the capital flow environment for emerging markets has improved recently, 
this has not applied to equity flows. South Africa’s experience has mirrored this, but 
with stronger equity outflows. According to the JSE, since the beginning of the year, 
net sales of domestic equities by non-residents have amounted to R56 bn. By 
contrast, non-residents have been net purchasers of domestic government bonds 
(year-to-date R23 bn), although the past two weeks has seen net sales.  
The domestic economic growth outlook remains weak, with the Bank’s GDP growth 
forecast for 2016 revised down from 0,8 per cent to 0,6 per cent. While a recovery is 
still expected in the next two years, the forecasts for both these years have been 
revised down by 0,1 percentage point to 1,3 per cent and 1,7 per cent. With the 
estimates of potential output unchanged, the output gap is expected to widen over 
the forecast period. The Bank’s leading indicator of economic activity continued its 
downward trajectory in February, consistent with the constrained outlook. 
6 
 
Recent high-frequency data paint a particularly bleak picture of the first quarter of 
this year, following a sharp contraction in mining output, minimal growth in the 
manufacturing sector, and declines in electricity production and consumption. While 
the Bank’s forecast for GDP growth in the quarter is barely positive, it does represent 
the low point of the forecast, and a slow upward trend is expected going forward. 
This view is consistent with the favourable developments in the Barclays PMI which 
has recovered fairly strongly, to above the neutral 50-level for the past two months. 
The real value of building plans passed, particularly non-residential, increased 
markedly on a 3-month-to-3-month basis, indicative perhaps of some life in the 
construction sector, despite very low levels of business confidence in the sector.   
However, while the recent modest recovery in commodity prices may impact 
positively on mining output, prices remain low and the sector remains beset by 
higher input costs and regulatory uncertainty. The continuing drought is also 
expected to put further strain on the agricultural sector.  
The economic slowdown is also reflected in labour market trends, with the 
unemployment rate rising to 26,7 per cent in the first quarter of 2016, from 26,4 per 
cent a year earlier. Although employment growth was positive over the year to the 
first quarter, the year-on-year growth rate moderated significantly, with employment 
losses recorded in a number of sectors including manufacturing, agriculture and 
transport. 
Household consumption expenditure also remains subdued, with low growth in retail 
sales in the first quarter. While there was a welcome increase in exports, new vehicle 
sales also continue to decline. The FNB/BER consumer confidence index recovered 
7 
 
to some extent in the first quarter of the year, although it still remains at depressed 
levels, and indicates a low willingness to spend and utilise credit among consumers.  
The constrained outlook for household consumption expenditure is indicative of the 
absence of demand pressures in the economy. This is also confirmed in the weak 
wealth effects and the continued slow pace of credit extension to households. 
Although some improvement has been seen in this regard, growth remains negative 
in real terms, and is mainly related to mortgage advances and general loans, 
particularly unsecured lending. Growth in credit extension to corporates remains 
strong, but moderated in March. 
Wage growth appears to be moderating, with growth in nominal remuneration per 
worker in the formal non-agricultural sector declining to below 6 per cent in the fourth 
quarter of 2015, mainly due to lower private sector remuneration growth. Once 
adjusting for labour productivity, growth in unit labour costs remained unchanged at 
5,0 per cent in that quarter.   
Food prices remain a significant risk to the inflation outlook in the face of persistent 
drought and exchange rate weakness. These pressures are evident in both the 
consumer price and producer price indices. Although for some time the MPC had 
been expecting an acceleration in food price inflation, the recent increases have 
surprised on the upside, and more aggressive food price increases are now forecast 
for the near term. The Bank now expects food price inflation to peak at around 12 
per cent in the final quarter of this year. However, should food prices stabilise or 
decline later in the year, there is the potential for downside base effects next year.  
Futures prices suggest that both maize and wheat prices are expected to remain 
8 
 
elevated for the rest of the year, reinforced by a sizeable increase in the domestic 
wheat import tariff.  
The international oil price assumptions in the forecasting model have been 
increased, with the price of Brent crude oil remaining firmly above the US$40 per 
barrel level since the second week of April. Demand has surprised on the upside, 
and, despite an increase in supply from Iran, output has declined in a number of 
countries. This upward price trend may, however, be contained by high levels of 
inventories. Domestic petrol prices have increased by a cumulative R1,00 per litre 
since March, mainly due to higher international prices and an increase in the fuel 
levy.  Should current exchange rate and international oil price trends persist, a 
further significant increase can be expected in June. 
The MPC faced the continuing dilemma of upside risks to the inflation forecast and a 
worsening growth outlook.  The risks to the growth outlook are assessed to be on the 
downside, particularly in the short term, despite the downward revision to the 
forecast. Both the mining and agricultural sectors are expected to weigh heavily on 
the first quarter growth outcome, and the outlook is therefore dependent in part on 
whether these sectors rebound in the coming quarters.  
The Committee remains concerned about the inflation outlook and the extended 
breach of the target. Although the inflation forecast has shown a moderate 
improvement over the medium term, the risks are still assessed to be on the upside. 
The exchange rate remains highly sensitive to domestic political developments and 
risks of an earlier-than-expected tightening in US monetary policy. The exchange 
rate implicit in the forecast is stronger than the current level, imparting a significant 
degree of upside risk.  While pass-through from the exchange rate to inflation 
9 
 
remains relatively subdued, there are indications that this may be increasing. There 
is also some upside risk to the international oil price assumption. 
The Committee remains concerned that inflation expectations remain at 
uncomfortably high levels. Although core inflation has remained relatively contained 
in recent months, with a lower peak now expected, it is forecast to accelerate and 
exceed the upper end of the inflation target range for four quarters in response to 
exchange rate and wage pressures.  
Some countervailing risks are also evident. While there is a risk that food prices may 
accelerate faster in the near term, the longer term forecast assumes that food prices 
will stabilise by year end, allowing for favourable base effects next year. However, 
should food prices, particularly grains, decline in response to a normalisation of 
weather patterns, a much sharper downward food inflation trajectory could transpire. 
The absence of demand pressures, and risks to consumption expenditure growth 
may also contribute to downside risks. 
The increase in the repo rate at the previous MPC meeting contributed to the 
improvement in the longer-term inflation forecast, and that move should be seen in 
conjunction with previous actions in the cycle and the lagged effects of monetary 
policy. The MPC felt that there is some room to pause in this tightening cycle and 
accordingly decided to keep the repurchase rate unchanged for now at 7,0 per cent 
per annum. Five members preferred no change, while one member preferred a 25 
basis point increase. 
The MPC remains focused on its inflation mandate, but sensitive to the extent 
possible to the state of the economy. The MPC will not hesitate to act appropriately 
10 
 
should the inflation dynamics require a response, within a flexible inflation targeting 
framework. Future moves, as before, will continue to be highly data dependent. 
 