Since the previous meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), the inflation 
forecast has remained relatively unchanged but the risks to the forecast have 
increased. The key risks are a marked depreciation of the rand; worsening drought 
conditions and their likely impact on food prices; and the possibility of additional 
electricity tariff adjustments. At the same time the economy remains weak despite an 
improved performance in the manufacturing sector, but both the mining and 
agricultural sectors appear to have contracted further in the third quarter.  
Although global financial markets have stabilised somewhat since the previous 
meeting, the outlook for emerging markets in particular remains challenging. The US 
Fed is likely to raise its policy rate in December, and further volatility in financial 
markets can be expected in the lead-up to this. 
 
The year-on-year inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) for all 
urban areas measured 4,7 per cent in October, following two consecutive months at 
4,6 per cent. Food and non-alcoholic beverages inflation surprised again on the 
MPC Statement November 19th, 2015 Page 2 
 
downside at 4,8 per cent, with a contribution of 0,7 percentage points to the overall 
CPI outcome. Services price inflation remained unchanged at 5,6 per cent, while 
goods price inflation increased to 3,7 per cent from 3,6 per cent previously. The 
Bank’s measure of core inflation, which excludes food, fuel and electricity, measured 
5,2 per cent, down from 5,3 per cent in the previous two months. 
 
Producer price inflation for final manufactured goods increased from 3,4 per cent in 
August to 3,6 per cent in September. The main pressure came from the category of 
food, beverages and tobacco products which contributed 2,0 percentage points to 
the outcome. Food and agricultural crop price developments are expected to sustain 
the upward trend in PPI in the coming months.   
The latest inflation forecast of the Bank shows a slight near-term improvement, while 
the medium-term forecast is marginally higher. Inflation is now expected to average 
4,6 per cent in 2015, and 6,0 per cent and 5,8 per cent in the next two years.  The 
anticipated breach of the upper end of the target range in the first quarter of 2016 is 
now expected to average 6,4 per cent, compared with 6,7 per cent previously. The 
trajectory for the rest of the year is also slightly lower than previously forecast, with 
the temporary breach in the fourth quarter of 6,1 per cent. The forecast for 2017 
follows a slow downward trend, with inflation still expected to measure 5,7 per cent in 
the final quarter. The changes in the forecast are due to a lower starting point for the 
forecast, lower international oil price assumptions, and an adjustment to fees for 
higher education which are more or less offset by a more depreciated starting point 
for the real effective exchange rate.  
MPC Statement November 19th, 2015 Page 3 
 
The forecast for core inflation is marginally higher, with an expected average of 5,5 
per cent in 2016, and 5,4 per cent in 2017, mainly due to the more depreciated 
exchange rate assumption.  
The BER inflation expectations survey is only due for release in December. The 
median inflation forecast of analysts polled in the latest Reuters Econometer survey 
is similar to that of the Bank, and also declined marginally since the previous survey. 
The breakeven inflation rates, while having improved since the previous meeting, 
remain above the upper end of the target range.  
Divergent global developments continue to create a challenging environment for 
monetary policy. Although the US recovery appears to be sustained with further 
improvements in the labour market, the strong dollar poses downside risks to both 
growth and inflation. The UK economy also remains on its recovery path.  By 
contrast, the recovery in the euro area is much weaker, although the outlook is more 
favourable than it was earlier in the year. The Japanese economy has contracted for 
two consecutive quarters, with positive, but slow growth expected in the coming 
quarters. 
The Chinese economy shows signs of stabilising, aided by policy stimulus, but the 
medium-term outlook remains a concern. There is still some uncertainty regarding 
the extent to which services output and consumption has compensated for the 
decline in industrial output and investment. A tail-risk of a hard landing remains, 
which would have a significant impact on countries with direct trade linkages, 
particularly those in Asia, as well as on commodity prices.  
Russia and Brazil remain in recession, while the strong performance of the Indian 
economy has been sustained following a number of structural reforms. The outlook 
MPC Statement November 19th, 2015 Page 4 
 
for sub-Saharan Africa, while still positive, has deteriorated in the wake of lower 
commodity prices, and further weakening could create greater headwinds for South 
African manufactured exports to this region. 
Global inflation trends are also benign, with concerns about deflation abating in most 
advanced economies. Despite significant currency depreciations in commodity
producing economies in particular, inflation pressures have generally been 
surprisingly contained, with a few exceptions. Emerging markets have had differing 
experiences: a number of countries in Latin America, particularly commodity 
producers, have tightened policy in recent months in response to incipient 
inflationary pressures, while others with low inflation, particularly in Asia, have 
loosened policy further. 
In the advanced economies, monetary policy divergence is expected to continue.  
Monetary policy is set to remain accommodative in the euro area and Japan, with 
possible further quantitative easing, against a backdrop of slow growth and benign 
inflation pressures. In the US, inflation and labour market dynamics, as well as Fed 
communication, suggest that in the absence of any major surprises or shocks, an 
increase in the policy rate can be expected in December. Market expectations are for 
monetary policy tightening in the UK to commence sometime in the second half of 
2016, later than previously expected. 
Although volatility in global asset markets has moderated amid improving risk 
sentiment, emerging market foreign exchange markets have been relatively volatile 
and vulnerable to capital outflows. In the past three months South Africa has also 
seen net portfolio outflows: since the end of August, according to the JSE data, non
MPC Statement November 19th, 2015 Page 5 
 
resident sales of equities amounted to R25,9 billion, while net bond sales amounted 
to R5,9 billion. 
The rand exchange rate has been particularly volatile, even compared to its peers, 
as domestic factors also impacted on the currency. Since the previous meeting of 
the MPC, the rand has appreciated by about 1,0 per cent against the euro but has 
depreciated by around 3,0 per cent against the dollar, and by 1,5 per cent on a 
trade-weighted basis. As before, the extent to which Fed tightening has been priced 
into the exchange rate remains uncertain. Nevertheless, a high degree of volatility 
and overshooting of the exchange rate may be expected in the lead-up to, and in the 
immediate aftermath of the start of the US interest rate cycle. Fed communication of 
future moves will be key. To date, the indications are that a moderate policy hiking 
cycle will be pursued. 
The domestic economic growth prospects remain subdued amid weak business 
confidence, but a further contraction in the third quarter is not expected. The Bank’s 
forecast for GDP growth has been revised down marginally for 2015 and 2016 to 1,4 
per cent and 1,5 per cent, but remains unchanged at 2,1 per cent for 2017. The 
estimate of short-term potential output remains unchanged at 1,8 per cent for this 
year, rising to 2,1 per cent in 2017. The Bank’s composite leading business cycle 
indicator declined further in August, consistent with the fragile outlook.  
The manufacturing sector recovered somewhat in the third quarter, mainly due to a 
surprisingly strong performance in September, and is expected to have contributed 
positively to GDP growth. However, the Barclays PMI declined further in October, 
and has been below the neutral level of 50 for three consecutive months, suggesting 
a constrained outlook for the sector. The mining sector is expected to subtract from 
MPC Statement November 19th, 2015 Page 6 
 
GDP growth following a further contraction in the third quarter, while the continuing 
drought points to a third successive quarterly contraction for the agricultural sector. 
The outlook for the construction sector is constrained following significant declines in 
new building plans passed, and reflected in a 9 point drop in the FNB/BER Building 
Confidence Index. 
Against this backdrop, formal sector employment trends remain disappointing. 
According to the Quarterly Employment Statistics survey of Statistics South Africa, 
employment in the formal non-agricultural sector declined in the second quarter of 
2015, as the private sector continued to shed jobs. Although the Quarterly Labour 
Force Survey indicates an increase in the number of persons employed in the third 
quarter, the number of unemployed persons rose sharply in the quarter as the 
number of new entrants increased. Consequently, the official unemployment rate 
increased to 25,5 per cent in the third quarter. 
There are minimal demand side pressures in the economy, with consumption 
expenditure by households continuing to be inhibited inter alia by low consumer 
confidence, declining disposable income growth and slow employment growth. The 
latest retail trade sales data suggest that household expenditure may have lost 
further momentum in the third quarter. Durable goods sales remain under pressure, 
as indicated in the intensification of the downward trend in motor vehicle sales in 
recent months.  
Consumption expenditure is also constrained by the continued slow growth in credit 
extension to households by banks. Unsecured lending remains subdued, and is 
likely to be impacted further by the recently announced caps on interest rates by the 
DTI, while the decline in growth in instalment sale credit and leasing finance is 
MPC Statement November 19th, 2015 Page 7 
 
indicative of the softer motor vehicle sales. Credit extension to corporates remains 
robust, particularly commercial mortgage finance, which reflects in part a switch 
away from funding in the bond market by property funds. 
The recent Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement signalled a continued 
commitment to fiscal consolidation by government, although at a slower pace. Most 
of the expanded deficit is attributable to lower expected tax revenues in response to 
the weaker growth outlook. 
Trends in wage growth remain a concern, and contribute to the persistence of 
inflation at elevated levels. Year-on-year growth in salaries and wages per worker 
accelerated to 8,7 per cent in second quarter of 2015, and after adjusting for labour 
productivity increases, total unit labour costs increased from 4,3 per cent to 5,1 per 
cent. By contrast, the average wage settlement rate in collective bargaining 
agreements recorded by Andrew Levy Employment Publications recorded a 
moderation to 7,7 per cent in the first three quarters of the year, compared with 8,1 
per cent in 2014. 
Apart from the exchange rate, the main upside risks to inflation come from possible 
electricity tariff and food price increases. Eskom’s Regulatory Clearing Account 
(RCA) application to Nersa to claw back excess expenditure of R22,8 billion is likely 
to lead to a further tariff increase, although the quantum and timing is uncertain. This 
is in addition to the 12,2 per cent tariff increase already built into the inflation forecast 
for next year. No provision is made for the RCA application in the forecast at this 
stage, but it is regarded as an upside risk. 
A higher food price trajectory has been incorporated in the forecast for some time, 
but food price inflation has surprised on the downside in recent months, despite 
MPC Statement November 19th, 2015 Page 8 
 
sharp increases in maize and cereals prices earlier in the year. However, the 
increased intensity of the drought which has led to downward revisions of the 
domestic maize crop estimate, as well as incipient pressures evident in both the PPI 
and CPI, suggest that an acceleration in food price inflation is likely, adding to the 
upside risk to the inflation outlook. 
By contrast, international oil price developments are expected to remain benign with 
current spot prices below US$45 per barrel, somewhat lower than those assumed 
over the forecast period. Although petrol prices have contributed to a succession of 
downside inflation surprises in recent months, the beneficial impact of lower 
international oil prices on domestic petrol prices has been offset to some extent by 
the depreciation of the rand. The latest data suggest that, should current trends 
continue, a small drop in the petrol price can be expected next month despite the 
further depreciation of the rand. 
Although the inflation forecast is relatively unchanged since the previous meeting, 
the upside risks to the inflation outlook are more pronounced.  As noted, these risks 
relate to the persistent exchange rate depreciation, electricity tariffs and food prices, 
and are assessed to outweigh possible downside risks from lower international oil 
prices and subdued exchange rate pass-through. While these factors cannot be 
dealt with directly through monetary policy, the concern of the Committee is that 
failure to act could cause inflation expectations to become unanchored and generate 
second-round effects and more generalised inflation.  Although core inflation has 
remained steady and inflation expectations to date have been relatively anchored, 
they remain at uncomfortably elevated levels. 
MPC Statement November 19th, 2015 Page 9 
 
The general approach of the MPC is to attempt to see through exogenous shocks 
and react to second-round effects. However, shocks of a persistent nature, for 
example extended periods of currency depreciation or drought, or multi-year 
increases in electricity prices make it more difficult to disentangle these first and 
second round effects. 
In the absence of demand pressures, the MPC had to decide whether to act now or 
later. On the one hand, given the relative stability in the underlying of core inflation, 
delaying the adjustment could give the MPC room to re-assess these unfolding 
developments at the next meeting, and avoid possible additional headwinds to the 
weak growth outlook. On the other hand, delaying the adjustment further could lead 
to second-round effects and require an even stronger monetary policy response in 
the future, with more severe consequences for short-term growth. 
Complicating the decision was the deteriorating economic growth outlook. Although 
the change to the growth forecast was marginal, the risks to the outlook, which were 
more or less balanced at the previous meeting, are now assessed to be on the 
downside.  
Against this difficult backdrop, the MPC decided to increase the repurchase rate by 
25 basis points to 6,25 per cent per annum effective from 20 November 2015. Four 
members preferred an increase, while two members favoured an unchanged stance. 
Despite the increase, the MPC still views the monetary policy stance to be 
accommodative. The continuing challenge is for monetary policy to achieve a fine 
balance between achieving our core mandate of price stability and not undermining 
short-term growth unduly. Monetary policy actions will continue to focus on 
anchoring inflation within the target range while remaining sensitive, to the extent 
MPC Statement November 19th, 2015 Page 10 
 
possible, to the fragile state of the economy. As before, any future moves will 
therefore be highly data dependent. 