Since the previous meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), domestic 
inflation has breached the upper end of the target range. This development was 
in line with our forecast and we continue to expect inflation to moderate 
somewhat in the final quarter of this year. While the outlook for the domestic 
economic growth environment remains unchanged, it has been overshadowed by 
protracted work stoppages.  Where wage agreements have been reached, these 
have generally been above the headline inflation rate, contributing to the upside 
risk to the inflation outlook. 
 
During this period, global financial markets have been dominated by continued 
speculation about the speed and timing of tapering of quantitative easing by the 
 2 
US Fed. The uncertainty related to this event resulted in a high degree of 
volatility and weakening in a number of emerging market economies foreign 
exchange and bond markets since May. The decision by the Fed to delay 
tapering surprised the markets, and emerging market currencies in particular 
responded strongly with many seeing significant overnight currency appreciation. 
The Fed emphasised the data dependent nature of its decision, indicating that 
this respite could prove to be temporary, as speculation regarding the timing of 
future tapering is likely to continue whenever positive data emerges from the US. 
 
The year-on-year inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) 
for all urban areas increased to 6,3 per cent in July and 6,4 per cent in August. 
Food and non-alcoholic beverages inflation measured 7,1 per cent in August, up 
from 6,8 per cent in July, while petrol prices increased at a year-on-year rate of 
23 per cent. Core inflation, which excludes food, petrol and electricity, measured 
5,1 per cent, down from 5,2 per cent in July, while administered prices excluding 
petrol moderated to 7,0 per cent. The headline producer price inflation for final 
manufactured goods accelerated to 6,6 per cent in July, up from 5,9 per cent in 
June.  
  
The inflation forecast of the Bank has deteriorated further since the previous 
meeting of the MPC. The forecast for 2013 is unchanged at an average of 5,9 per 
cent, but inflation is now expected to average 5,8 per cent in 2014 compared with 
5,5 per cent in the previous forecast. The forecast for 2015 has been raised from 
 3 
5,2 per cent to 5,4 per cent, and inflation is expected to average 5,3 per cent in 
the final two quarters of that year. The current breach of the inflation target is still 
expected to be temporary, and the peak was possibly reached in August. The 
deterioration in the forecast is mainly due to changes in assumptions related to 
the exchange rate of the rand and petrol prices, but given the overnight 
developments these assumptions will be revisited on an ongoing basis. 
  
The forecast for core inflation for 2013 is 0,1 percentage point lower, at an 
average of 5,2 per cent. This measure is then expected to average 5,4 per cent 
and 5,3 per cent in the coming two years, compared with the previous forecasts 
of 5,2 per cent and 5,0 per cent respectively, and to measure 5,1 per cent in the 
final quarter of 2015. This upward drift of underlying inflation is due to the lagged 
effects of the depreciation of the rand exchange rate and the impact of higher unit 
labour costs.  
 
Inflation expectations, as measured in the survey conducted in the third quarter 
of 2013 by the Bureau for Economic Research, have remained stable around the 
upper end of the target range. It is of concern to the MPC that inflation is 
expected to average 6,0 per cent in 2013 and 6,2 per cent and 6,1 per cent in the 
subsequent two years respectively. Business respondents expect inflation to 
average 6,4 per cent in both 2014 and 2015, slightly lower than in the previous 
forecast, while expectations of  trade unionists are unchanged from the previous 
survey, at 6,2 per cent and 6,3 per cent for these respective years. The 
 4 
expectations of economic analysts have deteriorated slightly since the previous 
survey but still expect inflation to average below 6,0 per cent over the period, and 
to average 5,8 per cent and 5,5 per cent in 2014 and 2015 respectively.  
 
Global economic prospects have improved in a number of the advanced 
economies, but downside risks remain. Growth in the US appears to be gradually 
improving, despite fiscal headwinds, and most forecasts are for growth in excess 
of 2,5 per cent in 2014. There are, however, a number of downside risks to the 
outlook which were also highlighted by the Fed. Financial conditions have 
tightened since the initial tapering announcement, and there are fears that the 
significantly higher mortgage rates and the observed downturn in mortgage 
applications could derail the nascent recovery in the housing market, posing a 
risk to household consumption expenditure. Fiscal policy is also seen as a source 
of downside risk, with the debt ceiling issue expected to resurface in mid
October. Failure to find resolution could result in further unplanned fiscal 
expenditure cuts. 
  
The Eurozone emerged from its protracted recession in the second quarter of 
2013 led by Germany, but economic growth is expected to remain weak and 
below trend for some time. This negative outlook is compounded by fragile 
political environments in a number of countries, including uncertainty regarding 
the ability of some of the peripheral countries to meet the conditions of their bail
out clauses amid stringent fiscal consolidation measures and deteriorating debt 
 5 
dynamics, and slow progress towards a banking union. The Japanese economy 
appears to be responding to the stimulus packages and the weaker yen, but it is 
still too early to assess the sustainability of the recovery. 
 
Fears of a marked slowdown in China have abated somewhat following strong 
growth in industrial production in August, amidst easing liquidity and bank lending 
conditions. While there are some concerns that the recent improvement is based 
on an unsustainable credit boom, growth in excess of 7 per cent in 2014 is 
generally expected.  
 
The expectation of an end to US quantitative easing prompted a sell-off of 
emerging market assets, which has the risk of further undermining the weaker 
growth outlook that has been apparent for some time.  While financial markets in 
these countries have reacted positively to the Fed’s decision not to begin 
tapering at this stage, the underlying weaknesses are expected to persist.  
  
Monetary policy in the advanced economies remains highly accommodative, and 
forward guidance suggests that low policy rates will be maintained for some time. 
Inflation in the advanced economies remains very low but there is speculation 
that a faster-than-expected decline in the US unemployment rate could prompt 
an earlier start to normalisation of monetary policy in the US.  Some emerging 
markets, notably Brazil, Indonesia, Turkey and India have either tightened 
monetary policy in response to currency depreciation, implemented a range of 
 6 
direct controls on capital flows or engaged in direct intervention in the foreign 
exchange markets. 
 
The exchange rate of the rand has been highly volatile since the previous 
meeting of the MPC, against the backdrop of a widening current account deficit, 
domestic labour disputes, and the reversal of capital flows to emerging market 
economies. The rand’s strong co-movement with other emerging market 
currencies suggests that external factors predominated over this period. Since 
the previous MPC meeting, the rand has fluctuated in a range between around 
R9,55 and R10,50 against the US dollar and appreciated by 2,3 per cent against 
the dollar, but is more or less unchanged on a trade weighted basis.  
 
The uncertainties related to possible changes in US monetary policy have been 
reflected in the volatile non-resident activity in the domestic bond and equity 
markets. Following net sales of domestic bonds to the value of R17,9 bn between 
May and August in reaction to the Fed tapering announcement, non-residents 
have been net purchasers of bonds in September to the value of R9,3 bn, 
bringing the cumulative total since the beginning of the year to R14,9 bn. Non
resident appetite for domestic equities has remained strong following net sales in 
2011 and 2012, with year-to-date net purchases of R28,3 bn.  
 
The risks to the inflation outlook from the exchange rate remain elevated and 
dependent on its future trend. A sustained depreciation trend could pose a 
 7 
significant risk to the inflation outcome. While there are some signs of 
generalised price pressures evident in the producer price index, to date the pass
through to consumer price inflation has been relatively muted, given the weak 
pricing power in the current low growth environment. 
 
The rand is expected to remain sensitive to global sentiment as well as to the 
current account deficit, which widened to 6,5 per cent of GDP in the second 
quarter of 2013. The deficit is expected to narrow in the coming months in 
response to the depreciated currency. However, this response is expected to be 
slow, given the import-intensive nature of capital expenditure by the state-owned 
enterprises in particular. Furthermore, export revenues are hampered by weak 
external demand, strike activity in the mining and motor vehicles sectors in 
particular, and declining terms of trade. The stepping up of exports is critical to 
address the current account deficit. While the rand has appreciated significantly 
in the last few days, the experience of the past few months is indicative of its 
vulnerability to future changes in US monetary policy. 
 
The domestic growth outlook is unchanged since the previous MPC meeting. The 
real GDP growth rate of 3,0 per cent recorded in the second quarter of 2013 was 
driven mainly by a recovery in the manufacturing sector, following the marked 
contraction in the first quarter. Despite the rebound, growth was below the 
estimated potential of around 3,5 per cent and the negative output gap widened 
further. The Bank’s forecast of GDP growth is unchanged: we still expect growth 
 8 
to average 2,0 per cent in 2013, and 3,3 per cent and 3,6 per cent in the next two 
years respectively.  The composite leading business cycle indicator of the Bank 
declined slightly in June, continuing its broadly sideways movement, confirming 
the subdued growth outlook. Business sentiment remains weak: the RMB/BER 
Business Confidence Index declined from 48 index points in the second quarter 
to 42 index points in the third quarter. 
 
There are, however, tentative signs of improvement in the manufacturing sector. 
The Kagiso PMI increased to its highest level in 6 years, and in July the physical 
volume of manufacturing production increased by 3,5 per cent on a month-to
month basis, and 5,4 per cent year-on-year. Capacity utilisation also increased 
marginally in the second quarter of 2013 to 81,3 per cent. Despite these positive 
trends, manufacturing output is expected to be adversely affected by protracted 
strikes, particularly in the motor vehicle sector. Mining output, which contracted in 
the second quarter, is expected to contribute positively to growth in the third 
quarter, following strong increases in production in July and a relatively quick 
resolution of the strikes in the gold mining sector. 
 
Growth in real gross fixed capital formation remains relatively weak, at an 
annualised rate of 2,7 per cent in the second quarter of 2013. A positive feature 
is the acceleration in the growth of private sector fixed investment expenditure to 
4,4 per cent, which more than offset the decline in outlays by the public 
corporations, mainly due to unplanned construction delays. Gross fixed capital 
 9 
formation as a percentage of GDP increased marginally to 19,5 per cent in the 
second quarter, still well below the levels of around 24 per cent reached in 2008 
and the National Development Plan target of 30 per cent by 2030. 
 
Employment trends remain extremely subdued, consistent with the slow pace of 
economic growth. According to the Quarterly Employment Statistics (QES) of 
Stats SA, formal non-agricultural employment increased by a mere 7,000 
employees or 0,1 per cent between the quarters ended June 2012 and June 
2013. Of great concern is the loss of jobs in the tradeable sectors of the 
economy. Over this period there was a loss of 23,000 employees in the mining 
sector and a total of 7,000 in the manufacturing and construction sectors, while 
there was an increase of 26,000 employees in the community, social and 
personal services industry. 
 
Growth in final consumption expenditure by households has been on a declining 
trend since the first quarter of 2012, but may have bottomed out, having 
increased from 2,3 per cent in the first quarter to 2,5 per cent in the second 
quarter. There was a notable increase in the consumption of durable goods, 
which could include pre-emptive buying ahead of possible exchange rate-induced 
price increases, as reflected in the sharp decline in new vehicle sales in August. 
The moderate trend in consumer demand is also reflected in the 2,8 per cent 
year-to-year increase in retail trade sales in July, and the month-on-month 
decline of 0,5 per cent.  
 10 
 
The FNB/BER Consumer confidence index increased significantly in the third 
quarter and expenditure is expected to be positively affected by high wage 
settlements and positive wealth effects. Nevertheless consumption expenditure 
growth is expected to be constrained by low employment creation, high 
household debt levels, declining rates of credit extension to households, and high 
petrol and electricity price increases, all of which are likely to curtail discretionary 
spending.  
 
The trend of wage settlements remains an upside risk to inflation and job 
creation. The current wage bargaining round has seen a wide range of 
settlements, generally above the current inflation rate. According to Andrew Levy 
Employment Publications, the overall average wage settlement rate in collective 
bargaining agreements was 7,9 per cent in the first half of 2013 and this is likely 
to have increased in the third quarter. According to data derived from the QES, 
average salary and wages per worker over four quarters increased by 8,7 per 
cent in the quarter ending June 2013, but when accounting for productivity 
increases, the unit labour cost increase amounted to 6,8 per cent. The ultimate 
impact on inflation will depend in part on the increase in the total wage bill, as the 
impact of higher wages may be offset by job losses or slower employment 
creation. We are concerned that the increase in productivity, although relatively 
low, reflects job losses and a switch to more capital intensive production. 
  
 11 
The moderate pace of bank credit extension to the private sector has been 
maintained with twelve-month growth of 8,7 per cent in total loans and advances 
recorded in July. Installment sale credit and leasing finance remained robust, 
while growth in general loans to households, which is mainly unsecured lending, 
declined to 20,2 per cent in July, the lowest rate of growth since August 2010. 
The shorter term trends for unsecured lending are more marked, with growth in 
the three months to July measuring 11,0 per cent and negative growth in loans of 
less than R30,000. Growth in mortgage credit extension has remained subdued. 
Twelve-month growth in credit extension to the corporate sector declined from 
10,5 per cent in June to 8,7 per cent in July, with some indications that this 
reflects a lack of demand by corporates. They remain relatively cash flush and 
have also placed increasing reliance on corporate bond issues  
 
Food prices are a risk to the inflation outlook, although the continued downward 
trend of international food prices has helped to offset the impact of the weaker 
rand on maize and wheat prices. Consumer food inflation measured 7,4 per cent 
in August, while at the producer price level, manufactured food price inflation 
measured 7,5 per cent in July. Price increases of agricultural products, by 
contrast, were muted at 0,5 per cent in July, with year-on-year declines in the 
prices of  cereals and meat, but strong increases, of 21,4 per cent, in fruit and 
vegetable prices.  
 
 12 
The immediate risks to inflation from international crude oil prices appear to have 
abated for now following a decline in the political risk premium, but prices remain 
highly sensitive to developments in the Middle East in particular. Having 
increased to a level of around US$118 per barrel in response to events in Egypt 
and Syria, the price has since moderated to around US$110 as the risk of US 
military action in Syria has subsided. Petrol prices increased at a year-on-year 
rate of 23,0 per cent in August, but favourable base effects and the small decline 
in the price in September are likely to result in a far lower rate of petrol price 
inflation in that month. The combination of a lower oil price and a stronger 
exchange rate observed in recent days is likely to result in a further moderate 
price decline in October, reversing the expectation earlier in the month of a 
further significant increase. 
 
The Monetary Policy Committee assesses the risks to the inflation outlook to be 
on the upside, mainly due to exchange rate and wage pressures. The decision of 
the Fed to delay tapering has provided a temporary reprieve to the exchange 
rate. However, the continued uncertainty relating to the timing of the inevitable 
slowdown in bond purchases and its data dependent nature, imply that emerging 
market currencies, including the rand, are likely to experience a protracted period 
of volatility. In the short run these developments may have moderated the risk to 
inflation from the exchange rate, but medium to longer term risks remain, which 
will be assessed on an ongoing basis 
 13 
The MPC remains mindful of the conflicting policy choices that it faces. The 
breach of the upper end of the inflation target is expected to be temporary, but 
the longer term trajectory is uncomfortably close to the upper end of the target 
range. At the same time, there are still no significant demand side pressures in 
the economy and consumption expenditure growth is subdued. The output gap 
continues to widen, and the employment data show that there is very little net 
employment creation in the economy, while employment in the manufacturing 
and mining sectors has been declining. Consumers remain under pressure with 
persistently high debt to disposable income ratios, further exacerbated by the 
rising cost of petrol and other administered prices.  
Currently, a sustained breach of the inflation target is not our central forecast, but 
the upside risks to the inflation outlook require careful monitoring.  Should the 
risks to the medium-term inflation outlook deteriorate significantly the MPC will 
not hesitate to take appropriate action in order to maintain the integrity of the 
inflation targeting framework and to anchor inflation expectations at a lower level. 
At this stage, however, given the global uncertainties and downside growth risks, 
the MPC has decided to keep the repurchase rate unchanged at 5,0 per cent per 
annum. 
 
 
Gill Marcus 
GOVERNOR 