 The Board of the Central Reserve Bank of Peru approved to maintain the monetary policy reference rate at 3.0 percent. 
 
2. This decision takes into account the recent evolution of inflation and its determinants,  which advises to continue with the pause made in implementing the preventive adjustments of the reference rate initiated in May of this year. Core inflation remains around the 2 percent target, while total inflation has been declining in the last two months due to the reversal of supply shocks. Future adjustments in the reference rate will depend on new information on the evolution of inflation and its determinants, as well as on the evolution of the international financial environment.   
 
3. Inflation in October was negative for a second consecutive month (-0.14 percent), mainly as a result of the decline of food prices. With this, annual inflation recorded 2.10 percent. Core inflation, which showed a rate of 0.17 percent, accumulated an annual growth of 2.07 percent and remains around the 2 percent target.  Inflation without considering food and energy rose from 1.12 percent in September to 1.31 percent in October. Inflation expectations remain anchored within the tolerance range.   
 
4. Indicators of economic activity show a strong dynamism. Thus, for example, the production of electricity has increased 9.6 percent. On the other hand, indicators of global economic activity confirm projections of a more moderate growth in the following quarters. 
 
5. The Board continues to oversee the projection of inflation and its determinants and stands ready to adopt future adjustments in monetary policy instruments in order to ensure that inflation falls within the target range.  
 
6. The Board also approved to maintain the following annual interest rates on active and passive operations in domestic currency (not included in auctions) between the BCRP and the financial system as described below: 
 
a. Direct repo and rediscount operations: 3.80 percent. b. Overnight deposits: 2.20 percent. c. Swap: a commission equivalent to a minimum annual effective cost of 3.80 percent 
 
7. The Board will approve the Monetary Program for December on December 9, 2010. 