MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary Policy Meeting No. 233, held on 12 April 2016. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member: Pablo García, Board member; Mario Marcel, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Rodrigo Valdés. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policy Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Juan Pablo Rioseco, Journalist of the Communications Department; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
After the last meeting, nancial markets had continued to favor risk-taking, partly because of a somewhat more optimistic feeling about the Chinese economy and the more cautious stance of the Governor of the Federal Reserve (Fed) in relation to the evolution of monetary policy in the United States. In Chile, with its ups and downs, the stock market, sovereign spreads and the exchange rate had been steady since the last meeting. The peso was even a bit more appreciated in a comparison of the averages of the ten days prior to the close of the two last meetings. The prices of most commodities, particularly expectations about their future paths, had descended by the the statistical cutoff 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
for this meeting, but still showed a signi cant degree of volatility. Long-term rates in the developed economies were still low, a symptom that the outlook for world growth remained pessimistic. 
In Chile, beyond leap-year effects, February’s Imacec had outgrown expectations, mainly driven by lines associated to private consumption which, unlike investment, was a little more dynamic. The labor market was still in its gradual adjustment process, as forecast, while consumers’ and rms’ expectations remained pessimistic. Overall, in general terms, output had not deviated materially from estimates in the March Monetary Policy Report. 
In ation had been surprisingly low in March, with the differences concentrated on normally more exchange-rate-sensitive items, including some goods in the CPIEFE index—such as apparel—, transportation, and some foods. Non- tradable in ation remained high and within forecasts. 
As for the impact of incoming information on the expected in ation trajectory, some elements had to be considered. First, surprises aside, in ation gures were in line with the analysis presented in the last Report, in the sense that the short-term in ation dynamic would be closely linked to the evolution of tradable goods, while non-tradables would decline only gradually, against the backdrop of still relatively narrow gaps, a steadily adjusting labor market and indexation effects. Second, it was obvious that if fuel prices moved according to recent market expectations, and the exchange rate uctuated around the levels of this meeting’s cutoff date, in ation would converge to the target a little faster than expected. However, it had to be recognized that there was a signi cant degree of uncertainty around these assumptions. On one hand, the real exchange rate (RER) was still somewhat below what its short-term fundamentals implied and, on the other, it was not easy to reconcile the actual and expected US macro data with the Fed’s so passive a behavior as was implicit in the prices of nancial assets. In addition, expectations for the future prices of fuels had been highly volatile. Finally, absent an intensi cation of them, the impact of the month’s developments on the medium-term in ation outlook should be mild, since they should not give rise to any signi cant second-round effects. 
Thus, the news of the month suggested no changes in the general orientation of monetary policy with respect with the last Report. In particular, it was still foreseen that in ation’s convergence to the target required a partial withdrawal of the monetary stimulus within the policy horizon. Of course, the pace of such withdrawal would depend on new information. In particular, if prospects of a faster convergence of in ation materialized, the pace of the normalization could slow down somewhat. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Still, it was important to note that, beyond the news and changes in forecasts, in ation remained high, especially its EFE fraction, which was expected to decline only gradually. As had been said earlier, this posed a risk by itself, especially if the good news were thought to be associated to volatile elements and that, in the present circumstances, upward deviations of in ation were costlier than equivalent downward deviations. 
In this context, the Research Division considered that the option of anticipating a rise in the MPR and take it to 3.75% in order to minimize the risks of a signi cant delay in the convergence of in ation, was still a valid option to examine, even though the month’s information pointed at a decrease of this risk. 
Meanwhile, in line with the latest Report, the option to hold the MPR at 3.5% was thought to be most consistent with the current scenario and related risks. This option also relied on the fact that in ation expectations were still well anchored. 
About the bias, since the arguments posed at this meeting indicated that the convergence of in ation to the target still required a partial withdrawal of the monetary stimulus, keeping the upward bias emerged as the most coherent alternative. However, as had been described in detail in the last Report, information gathered since indicated that, if the assumptions in the baseline scenario came true, the normalization of monetary policy would occur at a slower pace than estimated in December, a situation that the Research Division thought convenient to re ect in the meeting’s Press Release. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
All ve Board members agreed that, in general terms, both local and external data matched the projections in the baseline scenario of the March Report. On the external front, they noted the increased calm of international nancial markets compared with early in the year. One Board member mentioned that this relative calm came with signi cant risks, which partly explained the policy signals delivered by Chinese and US authorities. In his view, these risks were linked to four elements: rst, the still unbalanced channel of recovery in the more developed economies, with an important divide between the dynamism of the services sector, employment and consumption, versus the slow recovery of manufacturing, foreign trade and investment. Along the same lines, he added, concerns remained about a dynamic of exchange-rate competition in the developed world, which, in turn, re ected the limited room for maneuvering that the economic policy had in these countries to deal with the current and potential challenges they faced. Finally, concerns remained about the volatility 
of nancial markets and the risks of capital ow constraints or reversals that could harm developing countries especially. In other words, he concluded, the relative calm of recent weeks combined with persistent underlying risks shaped a scenario in which the likelihood of a worsening or improvement of the external environment affecting Chile were not resolved in one direction or the other, justifying the balance of risks presented in the Monetary Policy Report. 
One Board member noted that the external scenario continued to provide the main source of uncertainty. He stressed the better tone for commodity prices, hand in hand with seemingly looser global monetary conditions, which was probably behind the strengthening of the peso of recent months. However, from a broader perspective, the outlook for short-term activity remained weak in the United States, the Eurozone and Japan, the risks of de ation were still present in these last two economic areas, and it was hard to think that the improved indicators in China responded to a genuine and lasting rebalancing of the Chinese economy. The international nancial system was still under pressure, which was visible in the stock market valuations of some major global banking institutions. There were still doubts and much discussion about what the appropriate pace of effective normalization of the federal funds rate would ultimately be, as well as about the unfolding of the various tensions in Latin America. To summarize, and broadly speaking, the external risks remained clearly present. 
One Board member said that the relative calm in global markets came in the midst of a erce debate about the effectiveness of monetary policies with negative interest rates and their potential risks to nancial stability, as well as some symptoms of increased concern about potential in ationary pressures in the United States and the United Kingdom. All this indicated that the risks identi ed in the Monetary Policy Report remained in full force. 
One Board member said that the big question mark was on why the mood in international nancial markets had changed. In his view, the key was a prospect of a somewhat more expansionary monetary policy stance in the US than could have been foreseen. In fact, he added, the statements by the Federal Reserve Governor backed this market vision of a slower monetary normalization in the US. It was possible that this re ected a true weakness in the US economy. Alternatively, it could be the result of natural tension in the market regarding how to gradually exit an ultra expansionary monetary policy cycle, which, incidentally, was a dif cult decision and communication for the Fed to make. For now, the truth was that this approach, along with a signal of increased stability in China, at least in the short term, had meant a period of greater appetite for emerging assets. In his opinion, it was possible for this phenomenon to last still 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
for some quarters, even if ultimately it had an important temporary component, either because the US data would induce a somewhat faster normalization of the monetary policy, or because the lingering scenario of global weakness would inevitably end up affecting emerging economies’ prospects more severely than was already implicit in the projections. Therefore, he concluded, he believed that there were true risks that the current tranquility was temporary and that in the coming quarters asset prices and ows would adjust in the opposite direction. 
One Board member noted that it was premature to draw too optimistic conclusions from this scenario of external calm, because imbalances remained together with signi cant adjustments pending in different parts of the globe that, if it failed to take a smooth path, could cause higher levels of volatility to return to the markets in the near future. 
About the domestic economy, all the Board members agreed that February’s output data —above the forecast— and March in ation —below the forecast— were not enough to modify the assessment in the March Report. One Board member mentioned that the Chilean economy had performed marginally better than expected, but still within the phase of sharper economic slowdown seen since the last quarter of 2015. The information suggested that the rst quarter had not been as weak as feared. Still, the expectations of consumers and rms remained in negative territory, while exports showed no signs of a signi cant acceleration. He noted that the strengthening of consumption contrasted with a labor market that continued to deteriorate in the margin, but within a dynamic of increased exibility. 
One Board member noted that the GDP gure had been positive, con rming the projections in the Report, in a scenario where many had expressed doubts about whether the levels foreseen therein could be achieved. Also, consumption looked more dynamic. Everything led to revise rst-quarter growth upward, but that should not imply a signi cant change in the Report’s forecast for the year. 
Regarding in ation, one Board member stressed that the lower fuel prices, the stabilization of the exchange rate and the slowdown in nominal wages had helped to reduce the pace of in ation during the rst two months of the year, both at the headline CPI level and in its underlying indicators. In his view, the weakness of domestic demand and the widening output gap, plus the in uence of some speci c adjustments in the prices of services, which would tend to dissipate, suggested that this could be a more lasting slowdown in in ation, that would ratify the trajectory foreseen in the March Monetary Policy Report, and might even reduce the accumulated in ation at the end of this year in relation to the provisions in that Report. 
One Board member indicated that the low in ation gure had brought a favorable surprise, mainly from prices that could be associated with the exchange rate. The items more closely related with non-tradable services and goods brought no major surprises. In his view, it was important to weigh this information in a non-biased way. First, it could be re ecting the overall stability of the peso in recent months, showing that, fundamentally, the impact of the currency depreciation on the prices of tradable goods might have occurred already. Second, it was dif cult to argue that a scenario of weak growth this year and a modest recovery going forward was consistent with a real exchange rate near its historical levels, as had been observed lately. In this regard, he reaf rmed the vision embodied in the Monetary Policy Report of a path where the real exchange rate converged to a slightly higher level than the current ones. Finally, it was necessary to emphasize that the medium-term vision regarding the determinants of in ation rested mainly on the gradual disin ation of services stemming from a further weakening of the labor market. This, because the stability of the exchange rate at either a higher or lower level was not the main contribution to the medium-term outlook. In that sense, he believed that the Report’s estimate of in ation converging to 3% remained valid with the current data, as did the general orientation of monetary policy. 
One Board member said the March in ation had been a positive surprise, but one should take it as just one month’s gure and be cautious before drawing any longer-term conclusions. In any case, there were elements that allowed being moderately optimistic about future in ation. One was the exchange rate stability over periods of several months and not week by week, where it continued to show high volatility. In fact, the exchange rate had been in the current range for more than six months, and the Bank’s studies of pass-through coef cients yielded that the pass-through occurred in a high proportion in the rst six months after the parity changed. Therefore, if the exchange rate remained within the current ranges, beyond the variability of its high-frequency data, it should contribute to enhance price stability, at least over some time. The second element concerned a labor market that in the margin looked somewhat weaker —incidentally, this was more important from a medium-term perspective. Plus growth in nominal wages was still high measured over twelve months, but after a slight reversal in the previous month, it had returned to its slowdown path. Finally, external in ation continued to be low. Anyway, he said, this more favorable outlook could not be taken for granted as the cost of being wrong was particularly high after two years of in ation at or above the upper bound of the tolerance range and which had proved very persistent. Also where core in ation, and especially for non-tradables was still high. Thus, incoming data and their impact on in ation projections were particularly important. 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
About lending standards, one Board member noted that banks’ commercial and consumer loans had kept moderate expansion rates, consistently with the evolution of economic activity. In addition, new bond issues in both local and foreign markets had diminished signi cantly since the second half of 2015, totaling in the rst quarter of 2016 only 15% of the amount issued in the rst quarter of last year. All this in a context of low lending interest rates and low corporate spreads by historical patterns, and which combined with other available data, including the Bank Lending Survey, suggested that demand-side factors dominated behind these developments. With some contrast, mortgage loans had been more dynamic, although a number of indicators and factors suggested that this growth ought to be toned down in the coming months. Corporate and household debt had exhibited no major changes most recently. Thus, he concluded, the available information did not show a deepening of the vulnerabilities identi ed in the latest Financial Stability Reports. In his view, these antecedents indicated quite clearly that this was not an expansionary credit cycle where maintaining the current interest rate conditions could entail signi cant risks for the stability of the nancial system. Quite the opposite, he saw more risks in the consequences that a scenario of lower activity could have on the revenues of companies and households and thereby on their ability to service their nancial commitments and debts. 
One Board member mentioned that the Bank Lending Survey revealed that credit supply was being constrained to some degree, but credit demand was especially tight. However, aggregate lending indicators in general continued to show fairly reasonable dynamism, especially in the mortgage segment and, of course, to a lesser extent in commercial loans. This was consistent with the growth rates of less liquid monetary aggregates like M2 and M3, which had been growing more than 10% in nominal terms for several months. In his view, this re ected the role that monetary policy had played in this cycle in terms of providing the environment for favorable nancial conditions, despite the recent reduction in credit demand. 
Turning to the monetary policy decision, all the Board members agreed that the options proposed by the Research Division were the right ones. One Board member added that the options of raising the MPR by 25 bp or holding it at 3.5% were appropriate for the monetary policy stance de ned by the Board in the March Report. About the bias, he thought that it should properly re ect two elements. First, the medium-term orientation of monetary policy that was consistent with achieving the 3% in ation target within 24 months, which involved gradually withdrawing the monetary stimulus. Second, it should re ect the path foreseen in the March Report, considering the evolution of the macro 
scenario, such withdrawal could be made at a slower pace than the one seen by the end of 2015. He thought that the above underscored the importance of adequately communicating the prudence with which the Board intended to proceed in the current scenario, as well as the relevance of the in ation trajectory foreseen in the Monetary Policy Report as a key reference for monetary policy decisions in the coming months. Accordingly, the speed of the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus could naturally be adjusted to accommodate any diversion of the expected in ation trajectory away from that reference. 
One Board member said the decision was part of what had been outlined as a monetary policy strategy in the March Monetary Policy Report. Essentially, this meant a strategy of a more gradual normalization than had been contemplated by the end of 2015, due to prospects of attenuated growth and lower in ationary pressures in the short term, inter alia, by the relative strengthening of the peso. Regarding the scenario in the March Report, the overall news did not con gure a different medium-term scenario, beyond important external risks. All considered, then, the most appropriate thing to do was to keep the MPR unchanged and communicate that the future path of normalization toward a more neutral stance would be, as stated in the March Report, more gradual than had been reported in previous monetary policy meetings. In addition, he thought it appropriate to emphasize that this path would be contingent on macroeconomic developments and their impact on the in ation outlook. 
One Board member said that although both options —a 25 bp increase or no change— were valid, he was in favor of no change, because the scenario depicted in the Report was still true and the assumptions included no immediate increases in the MPR. In his view, raising the MPR this time would create confusion and possibly the costs would outweigh the bene ts. About the bias, he believed that the key was to validate the effectiveness of the message in the Report. 
One Board member stressed that, considering past gures, the option of holding the MPR, in line with the implicit communication in the Monetary Policy Report, dominated. In his view, the message that had been delivered for several months remained valid: that monetary policy would remain expansionary, but that a gradual normalization was required, that would hinge on the in ation outlook. About the bias, he believed that for the time being the conditions weren’t there for a neutral bias. His preference was for keeping the general tone, because it revealed a balanced view of monetary policy, as had been proposed so far and that, in his opinion, had been properly interpreted by the market. He also expressed his concerns about the communication, because excessive ne tuning could result in more confusion. 
5 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member mentioned that the option of raising the MPR was consistent with in ation persisting above the upper bound of the tolerance range and the risks from the recent more favorable in ationary news being linked precisely to the more volatile elements and, that could therefore be reversed. It was also justi ed by the costs of staying much longer away from the tolerance range. Any misstep in this area would lead to more abrupt adjustments in the future, a not desirable outcome. However, in his opinion, the option of holding the MPR clearly dominated this time around. It was more consistent with the fact that in the current state of the economic cycle in ationary pressures, particularly on non-tradables, should ease; with the fact that the exchange rate, beyond its usual ups and downs, had stabilized; and global in ation was still low. Also, and more importantly, it was consistent with in ation expectations two years out remaining anchored to the target. It was worth emphasizing this point, absolutely critical in a scheme of in ation targeting as the one in place in Chile. Deviations from the target were tolerable as long as in ation expectations over the projection horizon remained anchored. That was precisely what had occurred in Chile in the last couple of years. All this, incidentally, had occurred in a oating exchange rate environment. In his view, the expansionary monetary policy of the Central Bank had been key to contain the slowdown in activity and for the resilience of the labor market. The low interest rates, which in for the long term were at or near record lows, were clear proof of this. However, as had been said in the last Report, for in ation to converge to the target, in the baseline scenario, some additional withdrawal of the monetary stimulus would be necessary. Its pace would depend on the evolution of the economy and its effects on the in ation outlook. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Claro and Board members Vial, García and Marcel, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3.5%. 
