MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY 
MEETING The monetary policy session N° 197 was held on 11 April 2013. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board member; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Present as well: the Minister of Finance, Felipe Larraín. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Kevin Cowan, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Market Manager; Luis Opazo, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Consultant Manager of Communications; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s web site 2/. 
2. Options 
On this occasion, with the information gathered since the last meeting, the Research Division presented as the relevant option to keep the monetary policy interest rate (MPR) at 5.0%. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
The international scenario outlined in the last Monetary Policy Report assumed that world growth would recover gradually, the terms of trade would remain high by historic standards and Chile would face favorable global nancial conditions. As for risks coming from abroad, the scal and nancial situation in the Eurozone was still fragile and new turbulences in the region could not be ruled out. 
Domestically, it was estimated that the intensity of capacity utilization was tight as a result of accumulated economic growth. This growth had been led by domestic demand, driven mainly by investment. Forecasts in the latest Report saw a still high rate of investment, but its pace of expansion moderating as various projects matured. The recent dynamism of private consumption re ected growing labor income, while household credit ows had moderated somewhat. In addition, the latest Bank Lending Survey showed tightened standards for granting consumer loans, while household demand for credit had diminished. 
As for the monetary policy decision, the same as in earlier occasions, the option of lowering the MPR could be warranted by the low in ation indicators. However, the accumulated dynamism of spending, output and employment, together with stable in ation expectations around the target and declining external risks, suggested that the recent low in ation gures were a transitory phenomenon that would normalize within the policy horizon. In this context, cutting the interest rate would induce a slower moderation of domestic demand and exacerbate the medium-term in ationary risks. Accordingly, this option was ruled out in this occasion. 
On the other hand, the option of raising the MPR could be justi ed as a response to the recent dynamic of domestic demand and output and its possible impact on the future in ation trajectory. Although this risk was important in the medium term, headline and core in ation indicators were still signi cantly below 2%, where they would likely stay for some months considering the in uence of international commodity prices. Also, private in ation expectations were in line with the target, and the services and wages components of in ation showed no signs of acceleration. Taking all this into consideration, the option of raising the MPR was ruled out this time. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
All the Board members underscored Japan’s decision to make its monetary policy substantially more expansionary. Several Board members spoke about the consequences of this decision over the nancial and foreign exchange markets 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
around the world. One Board member said that, in any case, the real impact on the Japanese economy’s activity was yet to be seen. One Board member noted that this measure again attested to the dif culties the developed economies were enduring. Furthermore, in his opinion, it provided con rmation that the highly expansionary monetary policies of these economies could last for a while. 
One Board member noted that these policies in Japan were being adopted in a context where the marked differential between growth in developed and emerging economies was still present and where the rest of the developed world was also embarked in highly expansionary policies. In addition, he said, the emerging economies were beginning to broaden their nancial commitments at interest rates that they could not sustain over the long haul. This would increase the risk of new imbalances that could eventually result in a new crisis. In this sense, he said, the emerging economies faced an important challenge in terms of how to accommodate the massive liquid assets that were being injected into the global nancial markets. The hyper-expansionary monetary policy decisions of the main developed economies, which now also included Japan, were in a different dimension—because of their audacity and magnitude—from the central banks’ traditional parsimony. Emerging economies’ policy makers should analyze whether it was possible to accommodate such a stimulus, or otherwise assess the alternatives. 
All the Board members noted the widespread drop in commodity prices, particularly for copper. One Board member pointed out that the reduced copper price was consistent with the signals that the copper market was well supplied. He also noted that while the general guidelines of the Report’s baseline scenario still held, it was convenient to evaluate the risk of a signi cant drop in the metal’s price. In this sense, one Board member expressed doubts about the sustainability of the copper price over the coming years. 
One Board member highlighted the fact that the nancial markets seemed not to be discounting an imminent con ict arising from the political tensions in the Korean peninsula. 
With respect to the Chilean economy, all the Board members noted that output gures were showing some slowdown. However, they also said that it was premature to draw any conclusions from these data, so it was better to await more information before con rming a decelerating trend. One Board member said that, beyond February’s Imacec, which had been affected by transitory factors, there were other indicators that did support the hypothesis that growth was undergoing a normalization process. This was the case of manufacturing output gures and partial indicators for the construction sector. 
One Board member noted that in both the Report and the latest meeting the relative improvement of the external scenario had been highlighted, compared with an increase of the risk of the domestic scenario ultimately not showing the expected deceleration of output and particularly of demand. The latest gures, though partial, seemed to prove that the expected economic slowdown assumed in the Report’s baseline scenario, could be starting to occur. 
Several Board members focused on the tighter lending conditions prevailing, which had also been accompanied by signs of diminishing consumer and commercial loans. One Board member said that this re ected a more prudent behavior on the part of the banking system, which provided room for monetary policy action. One Board member pointed out that this was in contrast with the greater access to foreign nancing by Chilean rms and banks. 
As for in ation, all the Board members noted that it had evolved in line with expectations in the Report. Several Board members also stressed that market expectations were still betting on y-o-y in ation converging to 3% within the projection horizon. 
Several Board members mentioned the appreciation of the peso. One Board member commented on the increased volatility of the currency in recent weeks. In any case, he said, overall this was a global phenomenon, and the bilateral peso’s appreciation against the dollar had been low relative to the currencies of many other comparable countries. Thus, this Board member concluded, the evidence still showed that the exchange rate level was consistent with its fundamentals. 
Regarding the monetary policy decision, all the Board members concluded that the best option was to keep the MPR unchanged. 
One Board member opined that the natural conclusion from the information reviewed was that the baseline scenario continued to hold true. The concerns expressed in the Report about an expansionary cycle of the economy and expenditure remained. In his view, news from the last month contributed no new elements that could change such perception. 
One Board member expressed that the disparity between domestic and foreign risks remained in place, with all its connotations. But, he continued, the risk picture was still quite uid and therefore required permanent follow-up. In this context, the monetary policy option to not change the rate dominated by a big margin. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member expressed that the option to lower the MPR was inconsistent with the domestic demand dynamic, and that the perceived signs of moderation were still preliminary. Conversely, the option to raise the MPR was unreasonable in a still uncertain world scenario, with hyper-expansionary policies in the developed world and, moreover, with domestic in ation below the Central Bank’s tolerance range. Added to this were expectations of in ation achieving the target in the medium term. He went on to point out that, the same as in the previous meeting, the Chilean MPR continued to stand out for being high compared with other economies of similar characteristics and, in addition, various economies were still in the process of reducing their policy rates. Under such circumstances, he ended, there seemed to be no major developments that could justify a position other than that of the month before. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided to maintain the monetary policy rate at 5.0%. Voting for this action, Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board members Marshall, Claro and Vial. 
