MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary Policy Meeting No. 245, held on 13 April 2017. 
Present: Mario Marcel, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member, Rosanna Costa, Board member. 
Present the Finance Undersecretary, Alejandro Micco. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Mauricio Álvarez, acting General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Solange Berstein, Financial Operations Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Financial Markets Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Carlos Medel, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
In the weeks following the statistical closing of the Monetary Policy Report, important data had become known, especially at the local level. In February, non- natural resources sectors had performed better than expected, a situation that, however, had to do with some factors considered rather speci c. In addition, the positive surprise came in a context of still pessimistic expectations, sluggish credit growth and a marginally worse than expected labor market. About the latter, despite some red ags, the Research Division was of the opinion that they still did not justify altering the baseline scenario. Thus, incoming news did not materially alter the activity outlook. Meanwhile, in ation had matched almost exactly the Bank’s projection, with in ation excluding energy and foodstuffs (CPIEFE) and its goods and services components also aligned. In this context, four elements determined the options presented by the Research Division. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
First, given the full validity of the scenario depicted in the March Report, it was reasonable to conceive options that would maintain a monetary impulse consistent with its working assumption, i.e. “a MPR trajectory similar to the one that can be inferred from nancial asset prices in the ten days prior to the statistical closing.” In general terms, this trajectory considered two main elements: a moderate expansion of the monetary impulse in the short term and its gradual normalization in line with the recovery of the economy. In this sense, it was worth noting that MPR trajectories deviating transitorily and by not much from the speci c trajectory of asset prices set for reference, were totally coherent with the working assumption. After all, it said similar, not identical. 
In fact, as had been noted often before, the working assumption meant no commitment with a speci c trajectory of the MPR, but rather provided general guidelines on what the Board considered a monetary policy in line with the Report’s baseline scenario. Exactly how the dosage was administered was a topic for debate in each Meeting where, since no major changes tended to occur from one meeting to the next, many times the options depended on tactic and communicational considerations, as well as on the evolution of the assessment of the risks and their associated costs. 
Second, monetary policy was clearly expansionary. In the short term, the real interest rate was between 100 and 150 basis points (bp) below the neutral real rate, even with a prospect of further expansion in the short term. In addition, it was expected to stay expansionary for quite a while, as evidenced by the working assumption in the Report and the longer rates, which had fallen most recently, partly in uenced by the behavior of external rates. In addition, compared to other periods where the gap estimate for the next two years had matched the current one, the policy rate in real terms was even at somewhat lower levels. Finally, in a cross-country comparison with its peers, real interest rates in Chile were among the lowest. 
Third, in the current scenario, the main anchor of the MPR trajectory was the recovery of activity towards the end of this year and in the next, because the in ation forecast assumed a relatively stable real exchange rate, so its behavior would gradually lose importance in the evolution of in ation and its convergence, while the expansion of the gaps would gain relevance. Thus, barring a signi cant change in the expectations of economic recovery, one could hardly think of any big change in the in ation forecast and, therefore, more signi cant deviations of the expected MPR trajectory. 
Finally, it had to be kept in mind that the scenario contemplated some further decline in in ation in the short term, so that the working assumption of the 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Report was consistent with new decreases in this variable over the following months. In recent weeks, certain developments had suggested that this phenomenon might by intensi ed. In fact, the higher risk appetite, the change in investment strategies and the relative strength of copper had pulled down the nominal exchange rate, affecting short-term in ation. However, the implications of this phenomenon on medium-term in ationary pressures were far from obvious, so that one should not directly infer that a new boost in the monetary stimulus was necessary. 
In this context, the Research Division brought to the table two options: i.e., to keep the MPR at 3%, or lower it by 25bp, to 2.75%. Either way, the Division advised keeping the downward bias that, however, would consider that after the cuts of recent months, everything indicated that monetary policy was nearly at the limit of its expansionary stance in order to remain consistent with the baseline scenario 
The advantage of the rst option was mainly communicational, as part of the market felt—wrongly, in the opinion of the Research Division—that any rate below 2.75% would imply a material departure from the Report’s scenario. Thus, holding the MPR at 3% minimized the risk that some part of the market would interpret that recent data revealed a substantial deviation away from the Report’s scenario. At the same time, in broad terms, this option was consistent with the monetary impulse proposed in the baseline scenario and with market expectations. Opposing this option was that most indicators suggested that the likelihood had increased for the need to speed up the process of reducing the MPR. 
The second option had tactic bene ts, but potential communicational costs. Its downside was that it could be seen as a change in the vision about the economy and the impulse necessary to ensure in ation’s convergence. Such problem could be resolved with a neutral bias, but with the disadvantage that it could be interpreted as that 2.75% was in effect a very in exible low point in the current scenario, a signal not very coherent with the Report’s working assumption. From a tactic standpoint, cutting off 25bp had two advantages: rst, it left the Bank on a better standing in case the risk scenarios of lower activity materialized, which, in a context of low in ation and weak growth, could be more costly than if risk scenarios boosting growth occurred. In addition, in a context of expanded monetary stimulus, the discussion was always open about how low it would go. In that sense, delaying the cut bore the problem that it also delayed the completion of the process, extending the debate. Although the low point would never be clear, everything indicated that, under the baseline scenario, it was close. 
2. Monetary policy decision3/ 
About the external scenario, all ve Board members agreed that there were no major changes with respect to the Report, which assumed a situation with better growth prospects and favorable nancial conditions. Some Board members drew attention to certain risk scenarios, in particular, geopolitical ones or relating to the electoral processes in Europe. One Board member pointed out that the perception of signi cant political risks in the more developed economies contrasted with the gradual improvement of the economic indicators and some exuberance in the stock markets. This had helped to sustain the world copper price, despite some increase in uncertainty. 
On the domestic front, several Board members considered that, in general, local activity was still weak, as portrayed in the Report. Nonetheless, they noted that, beyond the expected fall in mining activity due to the Escondida mine strike, non-mining sectors had performed better than expected. 
All the Board members drew attention to the deterioration of the labor market and the potential negative effects on consumption if these trends persisted. Some of them pointed out that the fall in salaried employment had been widespread in terms of its sectoral origin, although partially offset by increased self-employment. Several Board members referred to the slowdown in nominal wages. One of them expressed his concern that the mix of shrinking salaried employment and decelerating nominal wages was comparable only with past periods of much greater economic distress than the present one, like the recessions of 2009 and the late 1990s. 
One Board member noted that the risk of a slowdown in consumption was con rmed by a slight increase in consumer credit default and a gradual deceleration of consumer loans. This attested to the validity of the prudent projections for private consumption in the March Report and the inclusion of a possible further deterioration of the labor market as a risk factor for 2017 and 2018. 
As for in ation, all the Board members agreed that March gures had been in line with the trajectory foreseen in the Report. One Board member observed that almost all the variation obeyed to the regular annual updating of prices in education. Without it, the contribution of the CPIEFE for services would have been practically negative, re ecting the incidence of the wider output gap on these prices. 
3/ In order to preserve the regulatory individual anonymity in the discussion, all ve Board members are herein referred to as males, including female member Ms. Rosanna Costa. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
According to one Board member, the peso appreciation of the last months or quarters had helped to reduce in ation, and an additional, transitory fall should occur in the coming months. If appreciating pressures on the peso continued, this trend could be deepened, but he thought it important to distinguish the underlying phenomenon when identifying the monetary policy reaction. In case the strengthening of the peso was in some way anticipating a stronger recovery of activity going forward, then its disin ationary impact would not necessarily call for more expansionary monetary policy. 
In terms of the monetary policy decision, one Board member opined that, with the Report’s scenario being essentially valid, the two options—keeping the MPR unchanged or lowering it sooner—were perfectly coherent. In addition, he believed that neither would take the market by surprise. About the bias, he thought that a downward bias could be read in many ways. It could signal doubts on the part of the Board regarding the Report’s scenario, in the sense that the recovery could be slower, which he did not believe, at least for now. It could also be construed that, in actuality, the Report was consistent with both a rate of 2.75% and one marginally lower. Whereas with a neutral bias, the message communicated was rati ed more easily, which, certainly, entailed the risk of having to change opinion if more adverse circumstances were validated. Not a complex matter, however, in his view. 
According to one Board member, it was important to make a special distinction of the temporary dimension of the phenomena then affecting the economy and, in particular, the in ation outlook. On one hand, the external impulse was improving. This, coupled with a monetary policy that would remain expansionary, was consistent with two things: one, the possibility of output gaps ceasing to widen as they were, and two, the onset of a gradual closure of them during the course of 2018. These were the usual lags with which the international scenario and monetary policy affected the cycle, and were the two key elements fed into the analysis for the Report’s forecasts. He did not think that any new indicators warranted changing these antecedents. On the other hand—and this was the second temporary dimension—, conjunctural news were generally pointing in the direction of milder in ationary pressures, including those from the labor market. Therefore, medium-term in ationary pressures were worsening rather than improving, so he thought it appropriate to reduce the MPR by 25bp at this Meeting. As for the bias, since there were no concrete conjunctural indicators leading to think that the cycle was at its turning point and, on the contrary, the true turning point looked a little farther away, he thought it better the keep a bias toward more expansionary policy- making going forward. 
One Board member estimated that the options proposed by the Research Division were the right ones. Keeping the MPR at matched the Report’s message—which was totally valid— and with the vision re ected in the Economic Expectations Survey. Cutting 25 basis points off the rate meant anticipating what had been expressed in the Report, but was consistent with the expectations inferred from market prices. In that sense, what truly mattered for this decision were tactic considerations. The advantage of a cut this time around was that it gained a month’s time for the new monetary stimulus to show its effects. The cost was that markets could interpret this as a prelude to further cuts to the policy rate beyond what the Report had expressed, which in his view would be wrong. Waiting had the advantage that it conveyed a message of calm and full validity of the Report, at the cost of disappointing the market to some extent. His impression was that it was worthwhile to give a signal of tranquility and thus re ect that there was limited room for making monetary policy any more expansionary. 
In the opinion of one Board member, to the extent that the different measures of capacity gaps remained open, monetary policy had to remain expansionary for an extended period of time. That was what the market expected and had been said in the Report. Therefore, lowering the MPR now was a reasonable thing to do, with no need to wait for new information. The Report’s baseline scenario provided enough room to evaluate how pertinent an additional adjustment would be, mainly considering the natural uncertainties surrounding the interpretation of incoming numbers and the room for discrete monetary policy around the speci ed trajectory. Various measures of market expectations pointed to an MPR between 2.75% and 2.5% by the middle of this year. He thought a neutral bias was valid, but could be seen as a rigid position with respect to a further adjustment of the MPR that, in his view, did not fully re ect the analysis in the latest Report. IPoM. Extra room for monetary policy making was limited because of two reasons: one, that the in ation forecasts at different terms were totally aligned with the in ation target, with market forecasts for activity and interest rates very much in line with those in the Report. Two, the conditions sustaining a recovery towards the end of 2017 were still present, so there was no scenario of persistent weakness causing sustained downward pressures on in ation. 
One Board member stated that incoming data fully rati ed the Report’s scenario and provided enough ground to begin materializing the working assumption of a lower MPR. Also, by combining a rati ed scenario of a widening activity gap, combined with no exchange rate pressures on in ation, with a deterioration in the labor market that could be somewhat sharper than assumed in the Report, 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
he thought it reasonable to keep open the possibility of further boosting the monetary impulse. This, without signi cantly deviating from the foreseen interest rate trajectory, would help enhance the probability of a recovery of activity and in ation in the second half of 2017 and into 2018, making sure the target would be met. In his view, reducing the MPR in the terms proposed on this occasion reaf rmed the Board’s commitment to act in a timely manner in its monetary policy decisions. Also, in order to materialize some slightly expansionary bias in a future decision, it would be important to act with suf cient conviction and persistence to effectively in uence the economy. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Claro and Board members Vial, García, and Costa, to lower the monetary policy rate by 25 basis points, to 2.75%. 
