MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 221, held on 16 April 2015. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Enrique Marshall, Vice-Governor; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Alberto Arenas. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Elías Albagli, Economic Analysis and Modeling Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Gloria Peña, Macroeconomic Statistics Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Senior Economist; Jaime Troncoso, Journalist; Yennifer Chahuán, acting Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
Incoming data since the statistical closing of March’s Monetary Policy Report con rmed the scenario depicted therein. 
On the external front, despite weaker-than-expected indicators, the recovery of the US economy seemed strong. In the Eurozone, improved con dence indexes and some better-than-forecast actual data had reinforced the positive vision 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
on its economies and the potential consolidation of the region’s recovery. The emerging economies continued to show signs of weakness, especially in Latin America. China also stood out with mostly negative news in the recent past. 
Global nancial markets continued to show volatility. Poor gures in the US had pushed back the market’s expected moment for the Federal Reserve to begin raising the policy rate, which had resulted in signi cant changes in the prices of other assets. Exchange rates had appreciated, stock prices had risen and spreads had receded. Even though these movements were positive, they also re ected the sensitivity of nancial asset prices to developments in the US and the risks associated with this situation. Commodity prices had shown mixed movements. Worth noting were the stability of the copper price, the increase in the oil price, and the weakness of the prices of some foodstuffs. Overall, these movements were in line with the forecasts in the March Report. 
Domestically, output and demand data con rmed that growth was stabilizing somewhat above 2%. Regarding the expected acceleration of the growth rate for the second half of this year, news was mixed. On one hand, import indicators revealed that investment had been weaker than expected, but business expectations had risen further during March. The unemployment rate was still low, but employment growth was the slowest since the global crisis of 2009. This, despite that the increase in employment in the agricultural sector had bene ted from a low basis of comparison, and that the self-reported jobs associated with the public sector had continued to grow robustly. Expectations of households had been revised down in March, mainly due to the deteriorating outlook for the country, but not because of a worsened situation at the personal level. 
Regarding the evolution of prices, after several months of upside surprises, in March in ation had been lower than expected by the market and projected by the Bank. Assuming that these surprises were persistent, and given the impact of the recent appreciation of the peso on the fuels scenario, in ation should be within the tolerance range in the coming months and at year’s end would be closer to 3% than had been foreseen in the Report. These developments were unmistakably positive. However, it was important to note that the lower-than- expected in ation had to do with the downward trend of some foodstuffs and the peso appreciation, both highly volatile elements whose movements could be reversed or intensi ed in the following months. In addition, the WTI oil price in dollars had posted a signi cant increase in recent days, which could also 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
modify this scenario. CPIEFE in ation, meanwhile, had evolved in line with expectations, thus ratifying the scenario proposed in the Monetary Policy Report. Market expectations for medium-term in ation remained well anchored at 3%. 
The release of the Report had affected nancial prices signi cantly. Expectations for the policy rate had ruled out the possibility of further cuts, the peso had appreciated more than other comparable currencies, and in ation expectations were similar to those described in the Report. So, in contrast with earlier months, there were no major discrepancies between the Bank’s vision and the market’s average. 
As for the most likely evolution of monetary policy, the Monetary Policy Report stated that, in the proposed baseline scenario, the most likely development was that by the end of this year or the turn of 2016 conditions would be ripe for discussing the normalization of monetary policy, since by then there would be clarity with respect to the convergence of in ation to the target, and economic growth would be more clearly headed towards levels high enough to begin closing the output gaps. This, obviously in a context where monetary policy was providing signi cant impulse to the economy and would continue to do so. Recent data were consistent with this analysis and no additional changes to the MPR would be required during the months to come. Accordingly, the Research Division proposed as the only possible option to keep the MPR at 3% and maintain the neutral bias. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
All the Board members agreed that news of the past month, aside from speci c events, con rmed the diagnosis outlined in the March Report. 
About the external scenario, some Board members commented on the risks re ected in incoming data from China and expressed their concern about the continuing decline of the Greek situation. One Board member noted that the gradual deceleration of the Chinese economy was possibly the main risk factor for the Chilean economy over the coming years and called for careful monitoring. In his opinion, on the positive side was its gradual nature, plus the fact that it had not led to a crisis, which was always a possibility after a lengthy period of fast growth and massive expansion of credit. Still, he continued, it was unquestionable that any further deceleration, however gradual, could have signi cant effects on industrial commodity markets, including copper. 
Several Board members commented that the news coming from emerging economies were more pessimistic, including Latin America, which continued to contrast with the strength of the US economy and the con rmed moderate recovery in Europe. One Board member said he had the impression that both Colombia and Peru were in the early stages of a signi cant adjustment in domestic demand, associated with the effects on investment of the downsloping prices of their exports. While there were some parallels with Chile’s situation, possibly with some lags, their space for scal and external maneuvering were different and, therefore, this was something that had to be followed closely, as there was a latent risk in the nancial ows to emerging countries. The Paci c Alliance was possibly seen as a subclass of assets within the emerging world, of which obviously Chile was part. 
At the local level, all the Board members pointed at the last in ation gure, which had been lower than expected. Some Board members stressed that this gure primarily re ected lower pressure on prices considered volatile like foodstuffs’, while the core trend had remained in line with expectations. The latter showed that the assessment of the impact of the peso depreciation on in ation, and doubts about the levels of activity gaps in the economy and the labor market were still valid. One Board member noted that one could not rule out that output gaps could have been somewhat smaller than originally estimated, and that this very development had resulted in a greater pass-through coef cient. The low unemployment rates and the persistence of wage growth were a sign of somewhat narrower gaps. Nonetheless, certain labor market indicators suggested that unemployment rates were headed for a rise in the coming months. 
In the opinion of one Board member the March gure for in ation helped to generate a more auspicious vision on its short-term evolution, it reinforced the diagnosis of convergence to the target in the medium term and reduced the risk of a misalignment of private sector expectations. He then stated that short-term in ation dynamics, however, were still a matter for concern as the previous month’s gure had been affected by one-time events. Moreover, the risk of a more appreciated dollar in international markets was still present, and the pace of nominal wage expansion, while stabilized, remained fairly high. 
Some Board members underscored the recent drop in the exchange rate, associated with the expected postponement of policy rate increases in the United States rather than with local phenomena. One Board member pointed out that the volatility of the exchange rate and other nancial assets made him see with caution how in ation forecasts depended on short-term exchange rate movements. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
About local activity, all the Board members agreed that it had evolved as expected. One Board member, noted, however, that demand, particularly investment, continued to look weak. In the baseline scenario, the GDP of the rst two quarters of the year would outperform GDP of the third and fourth quarters of last year. More importantly, he said, towards the second half of the year there would be an even stronger rebound. Domestic expectations and the international scenario just described were two risk factors behind this development. 
In the opinion of one Board member, output and demand gures were creating a low-growth scenario, with investment projections—especially in machinery and equipment—that anticipated negative growth in gross xed capital formation in the rst half. This was a big change, especially if compared with forecasts two to three months before. He expressed his concern about this, which was matched by a pretty important adjustment in the current account—greater than the one that other comparable countries had experienced—, and could intensify during 2015. He said that the current-account adjustment had been accompanied by a substantial depreciation of the peso in real terms, despite a reversal in recent months, so the Chilean peso was now aligned with its twenty- year history. This was in contrast with the dynamics of output and demand, which could be suggesting that the adjustment in investment—and in the current account— might be bigger than required. He concluded by arguing that this discussion also stemmed from the last published national accounts on mining investment, which showed a sharp increase in the ratio of mining investment to GDP in 2013. This analysis was an important input in the ongoing assessment on potential GDP and medium-term in ationary pressures. 
One Board member, while recognizing that domestic output and demand were growing at a moderate pace—consistently with the scenario in the Report—, noted that the overall projections for the year assumed an improvement in con dence indicators. At the moment, they were still in the pessimistic zone, and not every recent movement pointed in the expected direction. 
One Board member, expressed that the analysis of the Atacama oods showed a signi cant impact on natural resources GDP in March and April, which had to be considered when reviewing and communicating economic gures in the immediate future. 
About the monetary policy decision, all the Board members present agreed that the only plausible option was to keep the MPR at 3%. 
One Board member noted that both the market rates at different maturities and headline and expected in ation attested to the fact that the expansionary 
monetary policy had been the right choice in this cycle, and agreed with the Report’s message that a stable trajectory for the MPR into the coming months was the only valid option. 
One Board member considered that the option of lowering the policy rate had to be ruled out right away as pointless. The option of raising it, which had seemed fairly reasonable a month ago, seemed to have lost support lately with the new information and therefore had to be discarded too. In his opinion, it was advisable to reaf rm the general stance of monetary policy, because giving varied signals at a time when the private sector was increasingly assimilating the Bank’s diagnosis, could have adverse effects on the forming of expectations. He concluded his reasoning by noting that one additional element was the sluggish credit market, which was de nitely consistent with the weak demand already discussed. 
One Board member thought it important to underscore the Central Bank’s efforts of the past two years, even before any actual slowdown indicators had become apparent, rst with a more expansionary approach in its communications and later on with MPR cuts that accumulated as much as 200 basis points. Recent in ation-related events and projections indicated that at the time there was no room for any further monetary stimulus. It was also true that in the baseline scenario, where output picked up clearly in the second half of the year, maybe by the end of this year or the beginning of next year the Bank could be considering the possibility of starting to normalize the monetary impulse. Of course, he continued, in ation developments and prospects would tell whether such period would be shortened or extended. He also thought it important to mention that a normalization of monetary policy did not imply that it would cease to be expansionary. Actually, the MPR could be expected to continue on clearly expansionary territory, although to a lesser degree, for a prolonged time span. The option to raise it did not seem reasonable, at least for now, until new information could con rm the projections. Moreover, the option of lowering it did not provide, in his view, more maneuvering space in the current conditions. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marshall, and Board members Claro and Vial, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3%. 
