MINUTES OF THEMONETARY POLICY 
MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 209 held on 17 April 2014. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Enrique Marshall, Vice-Governor; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Alberto Arenas. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Erika Arraño, Executive Secretary to the Governor’s Cabinet; Natalia Gallardo, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
2. Options 
Based on the data known after the last meeting, the Research Division presented as relevant options keeping the monetary policy rate (MPR) at 4% or lowering it by 25 basis points, to 3.75%. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
The international scenario was similar to the one analyzed in the previous meeting and the contents of the March Monetary Policy Report, only with improved global nancial conditions. Concern over China’s economic growth and the Chinese nancial system continued. 
Domestic indicators con rmed that activity in sectors other than natural resources and nal demand were growing at a moderate pace, with less intensive use of installed capacity and less pressures on the labor market. The unemployment rate, however, remained low by historical standards. In March, in ation had been unexpectedly high once more. In the last three months the CPI and the CPIEFE had accumulated increases of 1.5 and 1.4 percentage points, respectively. This behavior re ected, broadly, the impact of the peso depreciation and the increases in the world prices of energy and food. In ation expectations in the relevant monetary policy horizon remained around 3% annually, while output gaps were expected to help ease domestic in ationary pressures over the medium term. 
Keeping the MPR unchanged could be justi ed in that it had already been lowered by 100 basis points in recent months, domestic credit was owing normally, short- and long-term interest rates had decreased, and the real exchange rate was above its historic averages, and at the same time in ation was near the 3% target. The decision to hold the MPR, without ruling out the possibility of further reductions down the line, would allow to accumulate more information about the effects of the adjustments already made and the persistence of the in ationary surprises of the past few months. 
Meanwhile, lowering the MPR was consistent with the outlook for that output gap, which should lessen in ationary pressures in the medium term. It was also consistent with the fact that the recent rise in in ation was a transitory phenomenon resulting from the peso depreciation and some one-time factors, and in ation expectations remained around 3%. This scenario, as had been noted in the last Report, could require an additional monetary stimulus to ensure that in ation remained around the target over the policy horizon. Still, a cut in the MPR at this moment would come as a surprise, especially considering the recent in ationary developments. In any case, market expectations, even after this surprise, foresaw further cuts to the policy rate in the short term. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
3. Monetary policy decision 
All ve Board members agreed that incoming news from outside and inside the country was consistent with the baseline scenario depicted in March’s Report. 
About the world economy, several Board members pointed out that nancial conditions facing emerging economies had con rmed increased stability. Notwithstanding, they noted that, from Chile’s perspective, the risks associated with the behavior of the Chinese and Latin American economies were still important. Also about the risks, one Board member drew attention to the low in ation gures in the developed world and the possibility of the European Central Bank injecting some additional stimulus, which coupled with the fact that the value of the euro was, however, endogenous to monetary policy. Some Board members mentioned the risks associated with geopolitical problems, in particular from Ukraine. 
About the domestic economy, several Board members noted that output gures con rmed a scenario where the sectors most closely linked to domestic demand were losing strength. One Board member said that the economy was growing as forecast, but with a greater role played by exports, especially of mining products, which compensated for a weaker domestic demand. In his view, given the initial situation of a wide current account de cit, at least at trend prices, this was good news, since it reduced dependence on external nancing at a time that gradual adjustment in global liquidity was foreseen. He went on to say that, of course, if xed capital investment should not recover in the second half of the year as expected, underutilization of the country’s resources could ensue, but for the moment there was no conclusive evidence contradicting the above projection. 
As for in ation, several Board members pointed at the surprise in March. One Board member noted that, given this situation, it was very important to monitor this variable and its trend. In his opinion, of particular relevance was identifying possible second-round effects on nominal wages. While the latter also showed a slight marginal acceleration, this increase could be expected to reverse the labor market weakened. In any case, he concluded, it was crucial to do good follow-up of these variables over the coming months. 
Several Board members noted that medium-term inflation expectations continued to center around 3% with no major change from earlier months, but new developments did appear in short-term forecasts, so they could be expected to remain near the upper zone of the tolerance range for some months. Anyway, they thought that all the information at hand did not modify the vision that in ation being closer to 4% for some months would be a transitory 
phenomenon and toward the medium term the economic deceleration should offset the effects of the depreciation of the real exchange rate. Still, this was something to bear in mind. 
One Board member noted that an in ation scenario was being established that was in line with the medium-term target, consistent with a situation where output gaps being created were offset by the peso depreciation and lower expected interest rates. In his view, this was the proper way to address the growth scenario envisaged in the March Monetary Policy Report. Actually, short-term effects on in ation indicators should come as no surprise. He added that in the past, in similar situations, as between the years 2000 and 2003, transitory increases in y-o-y in ation to 4% or above this level were also observed, which had no lasting effects on expectations. On the other hand, contrary to the period 2007-2008, now we were in the presence of a slowing domestic economy, very low global in ation, and normalizing global nancial conditions. 
Regarding the monetary policy decision, all the Board members agreed with the options set forth by the Research Division. One Board member noted that rst and foremost was to have the discussion on the options to draw from the baseline scenario in the Monetary Policy Report, which considered the possibility of further cuts to the MPR. In that sense, he added that the MPR could be kept unchanged as long as this expansionary bias was validated, in line with market expectations. On the other hand, reducing the MPR seemed right provided that, at the same time, the Bank could communicate that this was not a deviation away from the Report’s baseline scenario. In his opinion, communicating the second option —a 25 basis points reduction together with the message that further cuts were still possible— was more complex than the rst option. Thus, he was inclined in favor of the alternative of not changing the MPR and saying that further cuts would be required going forward. 
One Board member said that keeping the MPR at 4% was more consistent with current conditions, since signi cant monetary stimulus had already been added; so much that the MPR equivalent in real terms was close to zero in the short term and near 1% in the policy horizon. 
One Board member noted that, rst of all, the information available warranted the past decision of cutting 100 basis points off the MPR in recent months; secondly, it showed that the current level of the MPR was not very different from what might be thought of as appropriate, especially in a context of normal nancial conditions, where both money-market and long-term interest rates remained low, as did credit spreads and corporate debt. In any case, it was true and important to note some new signs of tightening lending standards in some 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
segments. Accordingly, this Board member concluded, it was more reasonable to maintain the MPR at 4% and leave open the possibility of further adjustments later if required, depending on macroeconomic conditions as they would unfold. 
One Board member noted that the MPR adjustment process had not been completed. Output gures reaf rmed the convenience of making further adjustments as described in the Monetary Policy Report, which matched also with market expectations. In his opinion, however, there was no hurry to take action this time. The MPR had been signi cantly adjusted and the next steps would necessarily have to be taken prudently and cautiously. 
One Board member said that the option of holding the MPR was consistent with its already expansionary level, with somewhat higher in ation, still low unemployment and credit owing in normally. Besides, he added, it allowed to analyze in more detail the effects of the recent movements and avoid making hasty decisions. On the other hand, he continued, lowering the MPR would be more of the same, consistently with a scenario of lower growth and reduced pressures on prices. However, although medium-term expectations remained at 3%, the recent increases in in ation and somewhat higher short-term forecasts called for caution and recommended discarding the option of lowering the MPR this time around. In any case, he concluded, in order to be fully consistent with the diagnosis and communication, it was necessary to keep the door open to further cuts in the future. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marshall, and Board members Claro, Vial and García, to keep the annual monetary policy rate at 4.0%. 
