MINUTES OF THE 
MONETARY POLICY MEETING 
The monetary policy session N° 184 was held on April 17, 2012. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board member; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Present: the Minister of Finance, Felipe Larraín. 
Also present, Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Kevin Cowan, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Market Manager; Luis Opazo, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Consultant Manager of Communications; Enrique Orellana, Monetary Policy Strategy and Communication Manager; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
1.1 Brie ng 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s web site1/. 
1/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
1.2 Background analysis and comments 
The discussion centered on the behavior of output in emerging economies, especially China, India and Brazil. It was noted that these countries were facing a loss of dynamism which partly warranted the monetary policy reaction of their central banks. 
The evolution of the labor market was commented, particularly growth in wages and its possible effects on in ationary pressures. It was noted that, for now, wage increases were consistent with normal indexation clauses, a productivity improvement in line with the cyclical stage of the economy and potential growth of 5%. In any case, it was posited that this was one issue where the uncertainty about the level of unobservable variables was gaining importance and had to be monitored with special care given its implications on in ation. 
2. Options 
Considering the information gathered since the last meeting, the Research Division reviewed the options relevant on this occasion: (i) to keep the monetary policy interest rate (MPR) at 5.0%; or (ii) raise the MPR by 25 basis points (bp), to 5.25%. 
Incoming information since the closing of the Monetary Policy Report did not drift away from the baseline scenario assumed therein. Internationally, the resurgence of nancial tensions in the Eurozone and in global markets con rmed the persistence of important doubts about how sustainable the advances made in the zone would be. As was noted in the Report, it was likely that in the coming months, periods of relative calm would alternate with periods of intensi ed frictions in both European and global nancial markets. At the same time, other external risk scenarios identi ed in the Report were still active: the possibility of a sharper slowdown of the Chinese economy and a steeper rise in the oil price. 
Domestically, incoming output gures pointed at a partial reversal of the positive surprise of late last year, but the moderation of domestic demand was yet to be consolidated. Information at hand indicated that private consumption and xed investment showed some signs of moderation early in the year. But other indicators, like consumer goods imports, were picking up in March. Construction investment was still strong and unemployment remained low. 
Although in ation had posted a low gure in March—leading short-term expectations to retreat -—the risks identi ed in the Report were still latent, 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
namely transitory pressures associated with rising fuel prices and the possibility of these price increases further propagating to other prices or to expectations. There was also the risk of core in ation accelerating due to tight conditions in the labor market and in installed capacity utilization. For the moment, these risks had not materialized. 
The Report used as a working assumption that the MPR would follow a path consistent with nancial prices, which entailed gradual, moderate increases in the second half of the year. Nonetheless, the occurrence and timing of these adjustments had to consider the evolution of internal and external economic conditions. In this context, the option to raise the MPR would be tantamount to anticipating the policy adjustments, which could have been warranted by a more favorable evolution of the world economy, an acceleration of GDP and demand threatening to widen the output gap and increase core in ation, or greater pass-through of transitory supply pressures to other prices, labor costs or in ation expectations. None of these conditions was present at the moment, therefore the option of raising the MPR was not recommended. 
It had to be noted that private expectations did not point at MPR increases in the short term and, in particular, at this meeting. Thus, an increase in the MPR would be an important surprise that would convey to the market a deeper concern over the strength of output or the in ationary risks, as well as the possibility of sharper, more intense increases in the near future. This could have unwanted consequences on the interest rate curve that, overall, was still aligned with the working assumptions in the Monetary Policy Report. 
As for holding the MPR constant, this was a valid option considering that its current level was within a range of neutral values for it, which allowed waiting for new information on the evolution of the external situation, the impact of transitory supply shocks and the state of core in ationary pressures. In addition, this option was what the market expected the most, so it had to be neutral for the evolution of the interest rate curve. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
All ve Board members agreed that news from within and outside the country were in line with the Report’s scenario. About the world economy, they noted increased tensions in nancial markets mainly associated to the situation in Spain. One Board member, said that, in his opinion, it was likely that the observed volatility would return, possibly even with increased intensity, considering Spain’s massive debts falling due in coming months. He added that 
all this was nothing but symptoms of underlying problems in the Eurozone calling for additional structural efforts. 
Several Board members also noted the moderation of output in China and the weak employment gures in the United States. One Board member commented that the mix of U.S. indicators had eroded the optimism with respect to this economy, which, at any rate, had yet to make major structural decisions, especially on the scal front. 
As for local developments, several Board members noted that output and demand were reducing their q-o-q growth rates. One Board member, called the attention to the strengthened recovery of investment in engineering works, the moderation of capital goods imports and the dynamism of credit in conditions he termed normal. Another Board member underscored the volatility of output gures of recent months. However, he added that, if averages were used, output growth was converging to rates not far from trend gures. Another Board member commented that the output surprise of December seemed to have been transitory. It was still unclear what exactly had caused it, but the hypothesis that it was related to the high concentration of scal execution in that month could not be ruled out. 
All Board members highlighted the low in ation gure of March. Some of them noted that this gure should be read carefully, given the volatility it had exhibited lately. Several Board members noted that, in any case, the market’s expectations had not changed signi cantly, nor did they differ much from the assumptions in the Monetary Policy Report’s baseline scenario. 
Several Board members highlighted the role that a tight labor market and wages played in the evolution of in ation. One Board member pointed out that, in his opinion, the rate of unemployment was approaching the limit of the NAIRU, so it would be necessary to monitor the trajectory of nominal wages more closely. 
When it came to making the monetary policy decision, all the Board members coincided in that the best option was to maintain the MPR at 5.0%. 
One Board member admitted that the option to raise the MPR by 25 bp had some ground, but concluded that the arguments in favor of the alternative option were overwhelmingly dominant. This, because the decision to hold the MPR followed easily from the last Report, which was still totally valid. Moreover, the market had aligned itself with the Bank’s vision, as con rmed by in ation expectations around the target for the medium term. Financial markets’ turbulences had reaf rmed fairly unbiased risk perception. The fact that the MPR was at a normal 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
or neutral range provided leeway to wait for more information before moving the policy rate. Finally, a course of action other than keeping the rate at would take the market by surprise, which would nd it dif cult to assimilate, as it overwhelmingly expected no change in the MPR. 
One Board member noted that the magnitude and depth of the slowdown in domestic output and demand was not evident enough to rule out the need for further increases in the MPR. Another Board member said that, although expenditure had decelerated, it had done so gradually, while some components, namely construction and other works, were still strong. According to this same Board member, should these components of demand fail to moderate, it could have implications on monetary policy, since the economy was already operating with tight output gaps. 
One Board member opined that the option of raising the MPR would be consistent with higher in ationary risks. However, he estimated that it was too soon to stray away from the baseline scenario, and even more so considering that core in ation was generally in the lower end of the forecast range. In ation expectations were still around the target and, although the market was expecting an increase, it did for the later months of the year. In future meetings it would have to be evaluated if conditions changed or came closer to some of the risk scenarios. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided to maintain the monetary policy rate at 5.0%. Voting for this action, Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board members Marshall, Claro and Vial. 
