MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 225, held on 13 August 2015. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Enrique Marshall, Vice-Governor; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Rodrigo Valdés. 
Also present, Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Pablo Mattar, Deputy General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policies Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
Background information presented at this meeting, as well as the preparatory analysis for September’s Monetary Policy Report, revealed a signi cantly higher in ation dynamic than had been expected just a couple of months back. The in ation forecast to December of this year stood quite above the estimate in the June Report. In the most likely scenario, in ation would surpass the tolerance range for longer than expected. Being persistently above 4% for so many months had only one precedent since the implementation of the in ation targeting regime, and involved not only headline or CPI in ation, but also core or CPIEFE in ation. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
As reported in earlier months, in ation’s elevated level, its high persistence and repeated upward revisions of internal forecasts posed a signi cant risk to medium-term in ation dynamics, as it all entailed a risk to expectations. In the opinion of the Research Division, the recent evolution of in ation, and especially of the in ation outlook, had aggravated that risk. This was particularly important in a context where part of the market considered that the current combination of slow growth and high in ation put the Central Bank at a crossroads, forcing it to choose between providing support to economic activity and complying with its objective of controlling in ation. 
Thus, in this context of successive increases in in ation forecasts, and in contrast with earlier statements, the Research Division considered that the option of raising the monetary policy rate (MPR) by 25 basis points (bp), intended to prevent a possible de-anchoring of in ation expectations, was a relevant option worth discussing at this meeting. The de-anchoring of expectations is a severe problem that should de nitely be anticipated, because, if it strikes, it has to be fought with stronger measures, as has occurred in the past. 
Despite the importance of this option, the Research Division was of the opinion that the facts being presented favored the option of maintaining the current course of monetary policy. This was based on the following: First, regardless of the substantial and continuous corrections to the in ation forecast, there was no evidence suggesting that, if medium-term in ation expectations remained well anchored, there would be increased in ationary pressures over that time span. Actually, the weaker situation of both the local and the international economy, coupled with the downward correction in commodity prices, suggested that these pressures had eased somewhat. This was consistent with the fact that, again, corrections mainly affected projected in ation at less than a year, and had to do with changes in the vision about the expected exchange rate trend. Meanwhile, the important exchange rate adjustment precisely re ected that the cyclical conditions of the economy had worsened, due to developments both inside and outside the country. In this context, the signi cant monetary stimulus that had been delivered for quite a while, was not to be construed as an option favoring economic growth over in ation control, but as a necessary measure to ensure the convergence of in ation in the medium term, considering the weakness of economic activity. In addition, higher short-term in ation was the transitory cost of such adjustment, which certainly had been longer and deeper than foreseen, as re ected in the successive downward revisions to the economic outlook. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Secondly, the option to hold the MPR unchanged was based on the great majority of the market sharing the Bank’s vision about the macroeconomic adjustment where the economy was immersed, which certainly helped to contain the risk of de-anchoring. In particular, both from the Bank’s surveys (i.e., the Economic Expectations Survey and the Financial Brokers Survey) and from the prices of nancial assets, it could be inferred that, although the market had made signi cant revisions to in ation projections at less than a year, expectations for longer terms showed no major changes and remained at 3%. 
The evolution of expectations and the way the market would understand the in ationary process had to be a central focus of concern in the coming months because, although incipient, some surveys showed a greater dispersion than before in in ation projections two years out. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
About the external scenario, several Board members noted that the outlook for emerging economies, Chile included, had become more complex. One Board member said that global growth prospects had not changed much and the numbers were still good for developed economies, but not for emerging markets. In his view, concerns about China were not subsiding and Latin America continued to give signs of weakness. Financial markets, he continued, remained vigilant to the beginning of the monetary tightening in the United States. This reinforced recent trends: a stronger dollar, higher risk premiums and lower commodity prices. Moreover, the risk of greater volatility had increased. He concluded that while the global economy was moving, on aggregate, in the direction of greater normality, which was certainly positive, the outlook for commodity-exporting economies, including Chile, had become quite gloomier. 
Some Board members underscored the effect that developments abroad were having on the peso and thus on in ation. One Board member drew attention to the fact that the convergence of in ation to the target was being postponed time and again because of the deteriorating external environment and its effect on key variables for the performance of the Chilean economy. This deterioration, he said, had affected economic activity, which was growing less than expected, partly due to a weaker than anticipated expansion in exports, in terms of both volume and value. The impact of this more negative external outlook, he continued, had been felt most strongly in the copper market, where prices had been falling steadily since mid-May, accumulating a decline of more than 20% already. This, together with the strengthening of the dollar around the world, 
had resulted in a nearly 14% nominal depreciation of the peso in this period. These events (i.e. the fall in copper prices and the depreciation), he concluded, were not part of the baseline scenario of June’s Monetary Policy Report and had signi cantly affected in ation and projections for the coming quarters. 
One Board member stressed that the authorities of the Federal Reserve had spoken clearly that the normalization of interest rates in the United States was set to begin by the end of the year, and the markets expected the process to be gradual. Still, he added, the pressure for a multilateral appreciation of the dollar was still signi cant. This was coupled with news coming from China, and the slowdown of its economy, which, incidentally, had been reinforced by amendments introduced to China’s exchange rate policy. He added that, in his view, the depreciation of the yuan was positive news for the macro adjustment in China, because the slowdown plus large capital out ows were hampering efforts to maintain the currency stable, stressing the money market and international reserves. However, he said, he believed it was not neutral from a nancial point of view, and several channels were being opened. Most important among these were a downward pressure to a further multilateral appreciation of the dollar, and that the disarming of carry positions that had existed in China for several years could contribute decisively to the volatility of commodity prices in the coming months or quarters. He added that the trajectory of emerging currencies had re ected these developments and certainly Chile had been no exception. The depreciation of the peso had been sharp, and a more depreciated real exchange rate (RER) was an important and healthy adjustment mechanism in the current circumstances. He added that, obviously, the cost in terms of in ation was high and the gures made available in the last month and, more generally, in the last quarter, suggested that in ation would remain above 4% for several quarters, and the convergence to 3% would be slow. He concluded by noting that the fact that the peso depreciation was in line with its fundamentals and the cyclical conditions warranted not to express an explicit concern over its trajectory, but that did not mean denying its signi cant effect on in ation. 
On the domestic front, several Board members noted that incoming data re ected some progress after several disappointing months, but they still showed no signs of regaining signi cant dynamism. One Board member said that the performance of foreign trade in July, plus business expectations re ected in specialized indicators, in the Bank’s Business Perceptions Report and in the latest gures from the CBC’s Investment Survey, showed clear signs of weakness. This was compounded with a further deterioration in consumer con dence gures. The same Board member added that he was surprised that all this occurred within a context of still positive labor market indicators, in terms of both job 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
creation and wage trends. Meanwhile, credit costs remained at extremely low levels, owing partly to monetary policy itself, and partly to the very favorable external nancing conditions. 
One Board member said he placed high priority on the challenge to reverse the deterioration of both business and household con dence indicators. He added that bank lending continued to evolve slowly, responding largely to demand-side factors, but supply-side ones could not be ruled out and should be monitored. He also noted that, despite the signi cant devaluation of the peso, exports had been slow to react. Although possible explanations could be found, the issue called for attention. 
With regard to in ation, all the Board members coincided in their concern about recent numbers and the consolidation of a scenario of higher in ation going forward. One Board member said that the increase in annual in ation to 4.6% in July was bad news for the Central Bank. The main explanation for this increase continued to be the rising exchange rate, which had lately depreciated sharply. However, the rise in in ation beyond expectations generated an immediate risk of propagation via wages, which could further increase the persistence of high in ation. He added that in ation had completed nearly a year and a half on or above the Central Bank’s tolerance range. Moreover, projections pointed to it continuing for several more months. In his view, the Bank could not be indifferent to it. While the explanations were clear, the high persistence posed a threat to expectations. Although this risk had not materialized, it should not be downplayed, nor did he think wise to wait for things to happen to then act. In that case it would be too late and, therefore, the reaction would have to be very drastic, a suboptimal policy action. In his view, the experience of 2007 and 2008 taught that being overly optimistic in this matter involved a risk. He thought that after a year and a half, and with prospects that in ation could complete two years above the target range, credibility became an inevitable topic. However, he continued, the information at hand suggested that this risk was limited, but not zero. Weak output and demand, and a particularly low external in ation contributed to this outcome. Thus, both the internal and the market’s estimates pointed at in ation converging to 3% over the projection horizon. However, it was also true that this convergence had been postponed time and again and high in ation had proved quite more persistent than expected. 
One Board member noted that what was most worrisome in the macroeconomic scenario was that the new in ation projections again postponed the convergence to the target, extending the time span where it would remain above the tolerance range. While there were good grounds to foresee that this convergence would 
occur within the policy horizon, it was also true that the risks of new adverse external shocks that could postpone it further seemed to be increasing. 
One Board member stressed that the current circumstances re ected a situation that could be said to be quite complex for monetary policy making. The slowdown in growth had been accompanied by rising in ation driven by the peso depreciation. The Bank had been clear that the combination of low rates, loose nancial conditions and depreciated exchange rate was a fundamental part of the Chilean economy’s adjustment mechanism. So had the market perceived it too, and the justi cation of in ation convergence to 3% over a period of two years —which was still valid— was also shared by the market. The gures of recent months, the internal dynamic and the external outlook suggested that the recovery would be slower than anticipated a few months ago and, moreover, there had been a signi cant upward in ation correction and a delay in its convergence. 
One Board member mentioned the evident general concern of the Board about in ation remaining above 4% for such a long time. Therefore, one should carefully evaluate all the indicators available that shed light on how medium-term expectations and the credibility of in ation returning to 3% were evolving. From the available data, the Research Division concluded that the risk was bounded, a conclusion he was inclined to share. He added that one should consider the dif culty of assessing and quantifying a possible de-anchoring of expectations. In his view, unlike in early 2008 and early 2011, when quite higher risks of expectation de-anchoring had been generated, or even materialized, the current conjuncture depicted a very different scenario: output gaps were widening, commodity prices were decreasing, and the exchange rate had depreciated. In addition, the output gap was creating disin ationary pressures, which, in the most likely scenario, would increase in the coming quarters. 
Regarding the monetary policy decision, all ve Board members agreed with the recommendation of the Research Division to keep the MPR at 3%. One Board member said that, while he welcomed that recommendation, he did not agree with considering the option of raising the MPR by 25 bp. On the one hand, he argued that, since private expectations at the moment saw a change in the MPR as very distant, to include this second option could convey the message that the Bank was preparing the ground to raise the MPR as the baseline scenario in the short term. This, in his view, would be premature or even a misdiagnosis, given that the consistency of the monetary policy strategy with private expectations was a matter that would be assessed as part of the preparation of the Monetary Policy Report. At the same time, it was questionable to consider the option of 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
raising the MPR based on a potential de-anchoring of expectations. This, because despite the Bank’s revealed and evident unrest about the high in ation level, no concern had been expressed about the depreciation of the peso, although there was broad consensus that this was precisely the factor underlying the high gures. Therefore, the proposal of raising the MPR based on the aforementioned risk of losing credibility, should be matched by an expression of discomfort or uneasiness about the level that the nominal exchange rate had reached, which this Board member was willing to consider. In other words, since the higher in ation was an exchange-rate development, the possibility of a de-anchoring of expectations would likely have to hinge on a peso depreciation of such magnitude that it would lead to an increase in in ation, which in turn would jeopardize the Central Bank's commitment with the target. Such scenarios were possible, but they would require a careful analysis of their policy implications to mitigate their occurrence. 
One Board member said that he agreed with the recommendation to consider a rise in the MPR as a relevant option. In his opinion, in an environment of generally deteriorating expectations, it was especially important to maintain the credibility of the Central Bank’s commitment with the in ation target. In this context, he believed that it was necessary to anticipate events, because reversing an adverse perception would be much more costly, in terms of not only in ation but also output and employment. However, in his opinion, at the moment any action in that direction would take the market by surprise and create confusion, which could be counterproductive, beyond the fact that expectations were still anchored. 
One Board member noted that the main risk facing the Bank today was that in the coming quarters the in ation dynamics could lead to relatively persistent higher in ation gures. In that case, the ability of monetary policy to hold on to an expansionary position for a long time could be hampered. Thus, he thought that both options were valid. In an environment of signi cant increase in in ation, and prospects that it would remain high for several quarters, and with expansionary nancial conditions, the option of raising the MPR should not be dismissed outright. Not considering it was inconsistent with the in ation outlook they faced, and could be interpreted as denying an important risk. However, he believed that the option could be quickly ruled out, because the arguments justifying the convergence of in ation to 3% remained valid. 
One Board member noted that news accumulated in the last month led to con rm the orientation of the current monetary policy, but there were developments calling for attention, including the fact that on the domestic front the vision of 
a lower than expected output trajectory and a higher than expected short-term in ation trend was being reaf rmed. In his opinion, having again two options for the MPR was essentially a return to basics. Overall, the information reviewed led him to quickly overrule to option of raising the policy rate and favor the option to hold it where it was. 
One Board member said that monetary policy had been highly expansionary for a long time already, despite above target in ation gures. This had happened under the premise that it was a transitory phenomenon and that in ation would return to the target in the near future. However, having in ation for so long above 4% was no small issue and by itself posed a risk on credibility. Accordingly, the option of raising the MPR looked reasonable, and should be discussed at this meeting. He thought that ruling it out could be seen as the stubborn denial of an obvious risk and, as such, it would be a mistake. Still, the cyclical situation of the economy and, most importantly, projections still pointing at in ation returning to 3% over the policy horizon allowed them to rule out, for now, the option of raising the policy rate. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marshall, and Board members Claro, Vial and García, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3%. 
