MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary Policy Meeting No. 237, held on 11 August 2016. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member: Pablo García, Board member; Mario Marcel, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Rodrigo Valdés. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policy Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
During the past month, developed economies’ long-term rates had remained low, and the prices of risky assets had risen further. Stock markets had gone up and risk premiums had moved downward. Thus, owing to a monetary policy that was expected to become more expansionary in developed countries and investors intensifying their search for yields, a scenario had been forming where the nancial conditions expected for emerging economies were materially better than those in the June Monetary Policy Report. In this context, the currencies of 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
emerging economies’ and other countries had appreciated. In Chile, the exchange rate stood at around 650 pesos per dollar at the close of the options minutes, a drop of 5% from the close of June’s Report. Meanwhile, prospects for global activity and in ation showed no signi cant departure from previous forecasts. 
Locally, the month’s available data, plus the preparatory analysis for the September Report, rati ed the main trends outlined in June. Investment was still very weak, due mainly to a further weakening of the construction component. Consumption growth had stabilized at a low level, because of a steadily deteriorating labor market and con dence indicators that failed to recover. Market expectations con rmed growth for this year slightly above 1.5% and around 2% in 2017, somewhat below the Bank’s internal projections. 
In this context, forecasts were that the in ation trajectory for the next twelve months would be below the one included in the June Report and that in ation would converge to the 3% target in the policy horizon. This change had to do largely with the expected effects of the drop in the nominal exchange rate on tradables in ation. The foreseen path for non-tradables in ation was virtually unchanged, which was viewed as important, because the risks of a reversal of the improved nancial conditions were still present. 
The numbers also suggested that the recovery in activity would be somewhat slower. Improved nancial conditions would help boost output in the medium term, but careful analysis had to be made before inferring a very signi cant momentum from this phenomenon. Unlike other episodes of greater risk appetite, the current one seemed to be guided by nancial decisions rather than by a more optimistic assessment of emerging economies’ fundamentals. Indeed, the outlook for gross capital formation in these economies were still depressed, a sign that the appetite for longer-term risk taking was not improving. 
Thus, all the indicators combined suggested that for in ation to converge it could be necessary to postpone the normalization of monetary policy with respect to the June Report, in line with the path that the market had been incorporating both into nancial asset prices and in various surveys, meaning that the MPR would stay where it was for a more prolonged period of time. 
So, considering the above, the Research Division proposed as the only option to keep the policy rate at 3.5%, and to communicate that the trends of recent months advised postponing the normalization of monetary policy. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
2. Monetary policy decision 
On the external front, all ve Board members stressed the relative stability that had been observed in recent weeks. One Board member noted the signi cant drop in the various international indicators of risk aversion, despite Brexit and important positive surprises in the performance of the US labor market. He added that this had resulted in portfolio capital ows to emerging countries, causing their currencies to appreciate and the prices of their nancial assets to rise. He further said that whether this re ected a more favorable nancial environment for these countries, or rather it simply showed one more of the many transitory swings of recent years, was yet to be seen. In any case, he added, there were still signi cant risks. China’s relative stabilization of growth was responding to scal stimuli that could not be sustained inde nitely and could suffer in case of a reversal of the recent improvements in world nancial conditions facing emerging countries. Another risk factor was the divergence between market expectations regarding the US monetary policy and the signs coming from the Fed. 
One Board member pointed out that the most striking external dimension had to do with more expansionary monetary policy prospects in the main developed economies. That this development was re ected in a comeback of capital in ows to emerging countries, in a search for yields that had caused a signi cant drop in long-term rates and a strong appreciation of emerging market currencies, including the CLP. He said that until a few months back the swings in asset prices—which, incidentally, he believed would continue—were circumscribed to a general process of normalization of international nancial and monetary conditions. In his view, a somewhat different baseline scenario was taking shape where external nancial conditions facing emerging economies were going to be more favorable still for some time, an important change from June’s estimates. 
Several Board members drew attention to the impact that the favorable evolution of world nancial conditions was having on emerging currencies, among them the Chilean Peso. Several Board members noted that this appreciation of the Peso had been larger than expected, and was helping in ation to converge to the target sooner than previously thought. One Board member added that if this appreciation would couple with a widening of the domestic output gap, the probability of a faster decline in in ation would increase. Another Board member noted that the velocity of in ation converging to the target would largely depend on the path of the exchange rate and economic agents’ expectations on the issue. He said that various measures of in ation expectations had seen downward adjustments for the coming quarters, consistently with the exchange rate appreciation, but they essentially remained around 3% for the medium term. 
One Board member noted that projections indicated that the convergence of in ation to the target was robust and would intensify in the coming months. In his view, this was backed not only by the speci c expectations for the CPI variation in the next two to three months, but also by indicators of in ationary trends, such as the reduction in the annual increase in total CPIEFE and even its services component. However, this Board member added, what could be seen as good news in terms of in ation, came with a further weakening of economic activity indicators. In particular, the Imacec had posted an expansion of 0.8% annually in June, mainly due to a drop in mining and investment, plus a slowdown in sectors that had been more dynamic the previous year. Although a more accurate diagnosis required National Accounts gures that would be published on 18 August, it seemed clear that the evolution of the economy pointed at bounded growth in 2016, with no signi cant rebound in the policy horizon. He concluded by stating that these prospects had already been internalized by the market, with adjusted expectations this year and next, as well as for in ation one year ahead. Expectations about monetary policy had adjusted accordingly. 
One Board member mentioned that incoming information showed several trends and turning points that he thought relevant. On one hand, those sectors that had driven domestic growth in recent quarters (e.g. employment, private consumption and construction activity) continued to weaken persistently, without others taking the baton in the foreseeable horizon. Actually, scal policy was also expected to continue on a consolidation path. Both short-term projections and the Economic Expectations Survey suggested that the output gap would open up in the remainder of this year, from already negative levels. On the other hand, in ation continued to decline over a smooth path, and was expected to stand around 3% by the turn of next year. In nancial markets, the Chilean Peso had strengthened, in parallel to the higher valuation of risky assets and emerging markets’ currencies. Finally, short-term monetary conditions in Chile—resulting from the combination of a stronger currency and an ex-ante real monetary policy rate—had become less expansionary in recent months. 
One Board member noted that activity had been hurt by worse-than-anticipated performance of natural resources, especially mining. In his view, however, nal demand data of the rst half seemed somewhat better than expected, in a scenario of persistent slowdown. In recent months, this slowdown was touching real estate construction, a sector that had helped to lessen the effects of the mining investment adjustment. The labor market continued to show some strength, with low unemployment and wages growing about 2% in real terms, despite indicators pointing to a weakening in the margin. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member mentioned that output and demand numbers con rmed the weakening trend of the economy. Consumption had worsened lately, while investment remained weak, with no signs of gaining dynamism. Moreover, growth prospects for this year and next had decreased. On the other hand, the labor market continued to show signs of a gradual slowdown, with lower growth in salaried jobs and some strengthening of self-employment. The overall unemployment rate remained bounded, while wages were still dynamic. 
One Board member expressed his concern about the direction that scal policy could take, which was not neutral for monetary policy. In his opinion, the announced expenses, and above all pressures for expenditure increases in the near future, could jeopardize the anchoring of the scal rule. 
About the monetary policy decision, one Board member noted that the sum of these factors was more than enough to justify holding the MPR at 3.5%. He also believed that suf cient evidence had accumulated to recommend adjusting the monetary policy bias. He added that even though the September Report would provide a deeper analysis of the macroeconomic situation and projections for the next two years, at this point it seemed obvious that the paths of in ation and its fundamentals had been postponing the need for an increase in interest rates for an extended period. Although changes in nancial conditions pressuring the exchange rate and in ation could not be ruled out, a deepening of Chile’s economic slowdown was also possible, which would widen output gaps and increase unemployment, thus generating downward pressures on in ation. Thus, understanding that in the long-term interest rates should converge to a neutral value, consistently with the in ation target within a balanced economy context, the Central Bank should be prepared now to respond to substantive deviations from the projected path, by keeping, raising or lowering the monetary policy rate accordingly. In his view, this should be re ected, in turn, in the options evaluated by the Board, avoiding surprises on the market. 
One Board member said that a stronger monetary stimulus was required than had been projected in the June Monetary Policy Report, a conclusion that was totally in line with the options minutes. In any case, he added, further analysis was needed of the practical and communicational implications of such conclusion, and he did not agree that the only valid option was to keep the MPR at 3.5%. He added that in June the only valid option had been to keep the MPR at 3.5%, therefore the need for further monetary impulse now would necessarily imply that lowering the MPR should be among the options because he thought questionable the view that the reduction in private interest rate expectations and in the forward curve was providing a greater monetary stimulus. On one hand, a attening of the curve was no unambiguous indication of a more expansionary 
monetary policy. For example, it could be due to a perception of lower long-term equilibrium rates that responded to a diminished appetite for investment, lower neutral rates or slower potential growth. On the other hand, even if a attening of the curve unambiguously implied a more expansionary monetary policy, it would be only coincidental if it meant with certainty a constant 3.5% MPR over the projection horizon. Finally, he added that it would be a mistake to assume that long-term asset prices, or expectations, could do the job of monetary policy and had to be compensated, for example, by the short-term instance, a strategy that could also cause major communicational complications. It had to be noted that the reduction in the expected path for the MPR, which was seen in the surveys and in the forward curve, had occurred despite the upward bias in the communication; therefore, it had failed to react to the Bank’s explicit signals of a more expansionary monetary policy stance. He concluded by stating that, in such a scenario, he was open to considering alternative options, but since the Research Division had proposed only one, he voted for holding the MPR at 3.5% and deleting the bias from the press release. In any case, he added, he felt that this was a bounded reaction to the medium-term indicators available. 
One Board member mentioned that the last Monetary Policy Report’s baseline scenario stated that, as the economy would resume the anticipated pace of recovery, output gaps would begin to narrow and a gradual withdrawal of the monetary stimulus would be required. Although nal demand (i.e., excluding changes in inventories) seemed to have increased somewhat more than expected in the rst half, preliminary projections pointed to a more pronounced decline in the second half of 2016 and a slower recovery in 2017. If this view was con rmed in the September Report, it would advise moderating the pace of monetary normalization, possibly delaying the MPR increases for some time. However, this scenario was still in preparation and could change in the coming days, once the National Accounts gures for the rst half of this year were inputted in the analysis. In this context, he voted for keeping the MPR at 3.5% and thought it necessary to also maintain the tone of the press release until a full review of the macro scenario for 2016 and 2017 was at hand, which would be included in the upcoming Report. 
One Board member said that the somewhat faster convergence of in ation and the prospects of slower growth warranted delaying the process of monetary policy normalization, which was also revealed in some measures of market expectations. In his opinion, monetary policy would stay expansionary for longer than foreseen some months back, but he thought that further analysis was needed to assess the course of the MPR going forward. The pace of in ation converging to the target over the coming quarters would hinge essentially on the exchange rate trajectory, which by its very nature could be quite uncertain. In 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
any case, he believed that the main point was to understand what was behind this appreciation of currencies. In his view, in essence, it was the result of more favorable external monetary and nancial conditions, without necessarily causing further deterioration in the global growth outlook. All things being equal, this should provide room to contain the domestic slowdown in 2017. Otherwise, it was important to assess what other elements could be holding back growth. About this, there were different factors, among them lower potential growth rates, which in one way or another restricted the generation of gaps and the effects on in ation of the lower growth rates. In his view, this hypothesis was quite credible and, so far, he did not see a deeper medium-term disin ation process than previously considered. Naturally, he concluded, it was subject to risks and continuous evaluation, and required constant assessment of the MPR’s neutral range in such a scenario. 
One Board member said that monetary policy had been expansionary for several years already and would remain so in the near future. In his view, it should never be forgotten that the Bank had maintained a low MPR in spite of in ation having been above the target for almost two and a half years. He said that he was personally convinced that it had been the right policy, but he was equally convinced that, considering recent history, special care was needed going forward. In his opinion, the Bank enjoyed great and well deserved credibility, but could not and should not overdraw from it. He agreed that the only option at this meeting was to keep the MPR unchanged. Raising it made no sense in the current cyclical state of the economy and considering that in ation projections pointed to a rapid convergence to the target. Lowering it was beyond reason in a scenario where in ation had been persistently high for more than two years. It was important, as it had been in the last three years, not to overestimate the effects of the exchange rate on in ation. If the exchange rate remained at its current levels, it would be reasonable to expect lower in ation rates, even below the target, for some months into the future. However, unless it became apparent after a while that there was high persistence, or second-round effects, it was unwise to react with monetary policy because, as had been said repeatedly, such shock would be transitory. About the communication bias, he said he was for changing it to neutral, which seemed consistent with the information reviewed. However, awaiting the next Report to change it was a valid choice, as it had the advantage that the decision could be explained in more detail, minimizing the likelihood of sending misleading signals, such as the intent of going beyond a at trajectory for the MPR, which would be a mistake under the current circumstances. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Claro and Board members Vial, García and Marcel, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3.5%. 
