MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY 
MEETING Monetary policy meeting N°201 held on 13 August 2013. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board member; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Kevin Cowan, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Claudio Raddatz, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Market Manager; Luis Opazo, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Advisory Department Manager; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Ivonne Vera, Senior Economist; Erika Arraño, acting Executive Secretary of the Governor’s Cabinet; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
Both the background information as well as the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
2. Options 
On this occasion, with the latest data known after the last meeting, the Research Division presented as relevant options keeping the monetary policy rate (MPR) at 5.0% or lowering it by 25 basis points (bp) to 4.75%. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
On the external front, the nancial conditions had improved slightly. World growth expectations had been lowered somewhat, mainly due to a gloomier outlook for emerging economies. Prospects for the advanced economies continued to show a sluggish recovery, and some recent indicators of Chinese output and foreign trade had brought a positive surprise. The dollar had depreciated slightly in international markets and the prices of metals, including copper, had risen substantially, while foodstuffs had shown a decline. 
At the local level, second-quarter output and demand had been growing at a moderate pace, falling somewhat short of projections in the June Monetary Policy Report, while nal demand continued to show dynamism and to grow above forecasts. Employment was increasing at around 2% y-o-y, although in the margin it had remained rather stable, with salaried employment growing less and shifting toward self-employment. July’s in ation had behaved in line with forecasts and in ation expectations had shown no major changes in the last month, remaining at around 3% annually in the policy horizon. Nominal wages were growing between 5.7% and 6.2%, depending on the measure. The Chilean peso had been at since the previous meeting, although somewhat more depreciated against the country’s trading partners’ currencies. The expected policy rate over the monetary policy horizon had been slightly adjusted downward, and pointed to a reduction of between 50 and 75 bp —depending on the source— in the policy horizon. The long-term nominal rates had remained stable. For this meeting, in particular, most respondents anticipated that the policy rate would not be changed. 
From a global perspective, the main concern was again the slowdown in China, because of its weight in commodity markets. Incoming indicators for the Chinese economy had shown a slight improvement, but there was still signi cant concern about the situation of its nancial system, which could have lasting consequences on China’s economic growth. 
Another concern had to do with the effects of the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus in the United States. Recent indicators had con rmed that this would probably begin in the coming months, but at the same time communications from both the Fed and other central banks, have indicated that future adjustments to monetary policy would be gradual and conditional on the state of the economy, which limited the associated nancial risks. Financial markets had reacted to these signals. 
As had been pointed out in previous meetings, the option of lowering the rate could be justi ed by the evidence of the trading partners’ reduced growth, lower terms of trade and tightened external nancing conditions. Also, both 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
internationally and in Chile, the mining investment cycle has matured, which will ease demand pressures on installed capacity and the labor market. So far in the year, both domestic demand and output were on a decelerating path and indicators of consumer and business expectations showed that this trend should continue in the coming quarters. All the other GDP sectors were growing below trend, helping to reduce pressures on the usage of internal resources. In ation had performed in line with projections in the last Report. Core in ation indicators were still below the target while the evolution of other indicators such as services in ation, nominal wages and in ation expectations, had behaved accordingly. In this context, lowering the policy rate would be an appropriate move to facilitate the adjustment of the domestic economy and keep in ation aligned with the target. 
Meanwhile, the option to hold the MPR could be justi ed in that the labor market was still tight and installed capacity utilization was still high. GDP slowdown was mild and nal demand continued to show signi cant dynamism, supported by its still-strong fundamentals, especially private consumption. New information would allow discerning how sustainable and deep the recent decelerating trends were, as was implicit in the projections in the last Report. This option matched the market’s consensus expectation for this meeting, so it would have no major effects on the yield curve. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
About the world economy, all the Board members agreed that, in general, recent events did not divert much from those reported in the June Monetary Policy Report. They all noted the improvement in developed countries’ gures, while emerging economies were in a process of downward adjustment. The process of recovery in the developed world was visible mostly in the United States. For some Board members, the better gures in the Eurozone signaled that the recession in the region could be bottoming out, but that a solid recovery was still far off, especially considering that there were signi cant risks in terms of their scal adjustment programs. Another Board member felt that, fundamentally, the Eurozone still mired in a long stagnation. 
The greater stability of international nancial markets in the last month was also noted by several Board members. One of them said that he was paying close attention to the potential effects and implications of the withdrawal of monetary stimulus in the United States. One Board member added that the expected announcement by the Federal Reserve Board could further in uence the emerging economies and their currencies, on top of the effects that the early 
signs of such announcement had already had. Other Board member noted that, despite the decline of sovereign risk premiums last month, the increase in long- term interest rates had consolidated in the United States, anticipating the start of the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus in the U.S. economy. 
One Board member noted that, along with the further deterioration of emerging economies, the external outlook had become more complex, as some of them (e.g., Brazil, India and Turkey) were also enduring nancial problems. Other Board member pointed out that in the case of Brazil, its higher sovereign risk premium above that of comparable economies re ected not only its economic slowdown, but also increased risks in international markets. 
For some Board members, recent gures from China were indicative of a more stable growth rate, stabilizing commodity prices and avoiding a sharp adjustment that would disrupt the rest of the emerging world. Another Board member noted that its decelerating process was still uncertain. Doubts were closely related to the evolution of the Chinese nancial system and, in particular, shadow banking activities, which had grown disproportionately in recent years. However, the country’s large volume of reserves and scal solvency helped mitigate such uncertainty. 
Regarding the evolution of the local economy, all ve Board members agreed that economic activity had decelerated further, but nevertheless, nal demand was doing so at a slower-than-expected pace. One Board member said that this surprise was possibly in uenced by isolated events. 
One Board member noted the evolution of GDP of sectors other than natural resources, that had grown less than 4% for the second quarter in a row. This Board member went on to point out that month-to-month gures showed wide variations, so July activity outperforming previous months should come as no surprise, owing both to the two extra working days and the low basis for comparison. September would feature the reverse effect. 
When examining domestic demand, several Board members stressed the still-dynamic private consumption, which was largely related to labor market developments in particular with a wage bill that was growing fairly strongly. In any case, several Board members noted that the slowdown in real wages would lead to a more moderate expansion of consumption in the near future. Some Board members noted that there were no signs that consumption was being driven by deeper household borrowing. However, one Board member expressed the view that some investment indicators pointed to a stabilizing domestic demand, such as upward revisions in the survey of investment projects for 2014 onwards and the recent slight increase in lending. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Overall, on the outlook for domestic output and demand, several Board members felt that the decline in consumer and business expectations surveys suggested a moderation going forward. One Board member noted that although the speed at which these adjustments occur are very dif cult to predict, the information at hand con rmed that the Chilean economy was decelerating gradually and smoothly, partly driven by weaker investment. Business perception surveys, the evolution of credit and the widespread stock market decline showed that growth prospects were now more bounded and in ationary pressures should remain subdued. One Board member said that the slowdown in domestic demand would continue going forward, which combined with the higher real exchange rate, would reduce medium-term risks of some variables such as the current account. As for GDP, he continued, it was possible that most of the expected slowdown had already taken place and that the remainder of the year would bring growth gures similar to those seen recently. 
All the Board members agreed that inflation continued with its gradual normalization process and was in the lower part of the tolerance range. They also noted that in ation expectations were at 3% in the policy horizon. Some Board members argued that in any case, core in ation would remain under 3% for a longer while. 
About monetary policy, every Board member said that this time there was no reason to innovate in the decision or the tone of the press release. 
In the opinion of one Board member, the two options raised by the Research Division were valid, as it was still necessary to make a small adjustment to the MPR insofar as some as the observed trends consolidated. Looking exclusively at the GDP trend, one could argue that this adjustment in the MPR could occur in this meeting, but he thought that demand-side indicators recommended to wait and see. The slowdown was not so clear in consumption indicators, although some of its fundamentals should begin to let go, which justi ed waiting for more information and thus not change the MPR. In his view, the data available this time suggested that the option of holding the rate was still the most advisable. 
One Board member noted that the market had assimilated the signals delivered by the Central Bank well and, consistent with this, anticipated some cuts in the coming months. This Board member considered that the data analyzed led to reassert the monetary policy stance outlined in the last Report. He did not think this was an issue in light of the information available. The point was whether to proceed at this time or rather wait. One could argue that the economy was gradually slowing down and was likely to continue along this path, partly because of the maturation of the domestic cycle and partly because 
of the weakened impulse from abroad. One could also argue that the MPR had remained in a comparatively high level and that the moderation of the domestic cycle had created room for a limited adjustment. This lent support to the idea of lowering the policy rate. However, recent gures again reaf rmed that expenditure, particularly consumption, was adjusting rather slowly. In these circumstances came the recommendation to continue monitoring its trajectory before adopting any policy action. The majority of the market expected no change, partly because it shared that diagnosis. Surprising the market on this occasion did not seem convenient. The signals delivered in the recent past had already produced some signi cant effects. Thus, for the sake of prudence, he felt inclined to hold. 
One Board member noted that the options presented by the Research Division were the most reasonable. He justi ed his reasoning by saying that holding the policy rate was consistent with a number of economic variables that were still strong, such as consumption and labor-market indicators. This also allowed waiting for a better assessment of the dynamics of the economy. Lowering the rate by 25 bp was consistent with a more complex external environment for our economy, with a signi cant slowdown in output, with headline in ation and expected in ation being contained, and various indicators, such as consumer and business expectations, pointing to a slowdown in consumption and investment in the remainder of the year. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board members Marshall, Claro and Vial, to maintain the annual monetary policy rate at 5.0%. 
