MINUTES OF THE 
MONETARY POLICY MEETING 
The monetary policy session N°189 was held on 16 August 2012. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board member; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Present the Minister of Finance, Felipe Larraín. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Kevin Cowan, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Claudio Raddatz, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Market Manager; Luis Opazo, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Consultant Manager of Communications; Enrique Orellana, Monetary Policy Strategy and Communication Manager; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
1.1 Brie ng 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, can be accessed on the Bank’s website1/. 
1.2 Background analysis and comments 
About the international scenario, it was said that the attenuation of global nancial markets’ stress would probably be temporary, considering that, 
1/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
although some of the recent announcements in the Eurozone pointed in the right direction and provided a route to exit the crisis, the region’s structural problems were far from being resolved. Accordingly, it was noted, that it was likely that tensions would return to the international nancial environment in the coming months. There were also comments on the signs of slowdown from some emerging economies, especially China and Brazil. 
There was debate about the dynamism of domestic output and demand in the second quarter of the year, noting that the acceleration in expenditure responded mainly to planned inventory accumulation. This, after an opposite behavior toward the end of 2011 due to an expected drop in sales as a consequence of the negative incidence that was foreseen from the external crisis on nal sales. This implied that a new accumulation of inventories of the same magnitude was unlikely. The strength of commercial loans was also noted. 
2. Options 
On this occasion, with the information gathered since the last meeting, the Research Division proposed as the relevant option to keep the monetary policy interest rate (MPR) at 5.0%. 
Incoming information did not signi cantly change the scenario foreseen in June’s Monetary Policy Report. Known global output gures showed a somewhat sharper deceleration in emerging economies and some improvement in international nancial conditions. Notwithstanding some advances in the Eurozone, its materialization still faced severe political dif culties, so the risks in the region were still present and in the external scenario the possibility remained for nancial stress to reappear in the coming months. In addition, the risks of a sharper deceleration in China and other emerging economies had increased. 
Domestically, installed capacity and the labor market were still tight, so growth had to be aligned with its potential trajectory in order to avoid in ationary pressures in the medium term. In the year so far, output and demand growth had been slightly above this trend. Recent growth indicators revealed a degree of dynamism that were somewhat surprising within a context of widespread international slowdown. For the second half of the year, growth forecasts by market consensus and the June Report implicitly supposed a deceleration in growth associated with the external scenario. For the time being, however, the signs of these effects seemed not so signi cant. This was one aspect that called for further monitoring in the months to come. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Y-o-y headline and core in ation continued to evolve under 3%. Since the last meeting, the world prices of grains and energy had increased, which would probably have a positive incidence in the behavior of the CPI in the coming months. Meanwhile, core in ation indicators —especially the services component— and nominal wages remained stable. However, news concerning these prices were also factors that required further monitoring in the coming months. 
Regarding monetary policy, the option of raising the MPR was ruled out this time, taking the recent evolution of the external scenario and its potential impact on the Chilean economy and the in ation rate into account. Headline and core in ation measures remained in the lower part of the in ation target range, while wages and non-tradable services in ation were stable and expectations continued near the target. 
The alternative of lowering the MPR was also ruled out this time, considering the tightening of output gaps and the labor market, which posed a risk on the medium-term in ation outlook. The external slowdown would likely help to clear this risk in the coming months, but such effects had been mild so far. 
The option of holding the MPR unchanged was founded in the fact that its current level was within a range of neutral values, while the economy was in a situation of closed output gaps and in ation near the target, which provided time and exibility to wait and collect information on the external developments and their impact on the Chilean economy. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
About the external scenario, all the Board members coincided in that news of the last month showed no fundamental changes. They noted that, particularly in the Eurozone, a better nancial climate was observed in the short term, possibly due to increased clarity with respect to the path that should orient economic policies. However, they added, it was also clear that in the next few months the European authorities would face tough tests, which would surely re ect in higher market volatility. One Board member noted that the calm observed in August was to be expected, as there were no major sovereign debt or other euro- denominated bond amortizations falling due that month. But, he added, there were some falling due in September and October, so a resurgence of nancial stress was a possibility. In his view, both the recent attenuation and the potential resurgence were part of the same phenomenon. Therefore, he interpreted that the underlying problems persisted in the Eurozone. Accordingly, the risks of a 
disorderly outcome, although not the most likely scenario, were likely enough so as to remain vigilant. 
All the Board members highlighted the frailty of global output indicators and, especially, the deceleration of the bigger emerging economies. One Board member noted that China continued to give signs of a limited slowdown and, for now, it was not evident that policymakers were taking further action to revitalize domestic demand. One Board member noted that the evolution of the Chinese economy was of paramount importance for Chile, and although agents largely expected a rebound in the second part of the year, this was not guaranteed. One Board member noted that, despite clear signs of deceleration in the past several months, almost every market forecast assumed that both Brazil and China should speed up in the second half of 2012 and in 2013. He said that close monitoring of this foreseen recovery was needed, because there were good reasons to believe that it could end up being considerably weaker than expected. 
All the Board members noted the increase in some commodity prices, especially fuels and foodstuffs. They also noted that these price increases seemed to originate in supply-side problems, either climatic conditions or geopolitical stress. This, because the same was not seen in other markets like copper, and neither was there a change in world growth prospects that could explain a widespread rise in these prices. Similarly, several Board members pointed out that these price increases could signi cantly affect not only international in ation, but Chile’s in ation as well. Besides, over the short term they could introduce more volatility in month-to-month in ation. One Board member added that although the rises in the prices of oil and grains seemed to originate in supply-side shocks of temporary nature, it was possible for these factors to persist, causing a greater and longer-lasting impact than expected. 
Domestically, all the Board members noted the combination of surprising increases in output and limited in ation, which was approaching the oor of the tolerance range. Some Board members noted that in the second quarter consumption and investment had followed a trajectory that did not deviate substantially from projections. At the same time, they noted that the main reason behind the acceleration of expenditure had been the increase in inventory accumulation. One Board member underscored the dif culties in interpreting movements in inventories. Another Board member noted that in the second half of the year domestic demand would not rise so strongly, provided that, as could be expected, the accumulation of inventories ceased. Still, he said, the effects that will be seen in the next few months, such as bases for comparison and number of business days, led to think that output indicators would be very 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
volatile, so now more than ever it was necessary to focus on the trends rather than on monthly gures. 
Several Board members noted that overall, news of the past month showed no big signs of a slowdown in the local economy. They based this appreciation on the performance of the labor market and credit, especially commercial loans. Some Board members expressed that this re ected the reality they had been facing for several months already: on one hand, an external scenario pointing in the direction of a slowdown and, on the other, a domestic scenario that pointed the opposite way. One Board member pointed out that, without overlooking the risks inherent in the vigor and strength shown by the economy, the diagnosis that the pace of growth was normalizing remained valid. One Board member said that domestic demand and output continued to surprise him, as did expectations for the two, for failing to re ect the deceleration of the world economy that was spreading to an ever-increasing number of countries. Plus, he added, the surprise came not only from the level of output and demand, but also its increased velocity of expansion. One Board member indicated that a careful review of the persistence of stronger-than-expected domestic demand was called for, and also of the possible risks associated to the dynamic evolution of credit, both at the household level and, especially, at the rm level. 
About in ation, several Board members noted that it was still low, a situation related to the behavior of tradable goods’ prices, since non-tradables were posting higher in ation rates. One Board member expressed that, for now, there were no major signs of in ationary pressures in the categories with closer links with the use of internal capacity or the state of the labor market. In any case, he said, he did not believe that the cyclical position of the economy left any room for a further drop in in ation in the coming months, aside from one-time factors that could appear. 
One Board member underscored the recent instability of in ation, recalling that, due to factors beyond control, there was an acceleration some months back, followed by a rapid decline to its current levels. He added that the recent evolution of the prices of grains and oil led to think that the in ation dynamic would be changing again. All this, he concluded, created noise that complicated diagnosing and taking decisions. Still, he indicated that, even considering capacity restrictions and growth prospects assumed in the most likely scenario, the medium-term in ation outlook had not changed substantially. One Board member pointed out that it was reasonable to expect higher in ation gures in the coming months because of the reversal of global fuel and food prices, as well as because of pressures stemming from the tight labor market and output gaps. He also noted that the drop in the real exchange rate pointed in the opposite 
direction, but some one-time factors, like those mentioned, led to also think that month-to-month in ation would be volatile for the next months. 
All the Board members highlighted the appreciation of the peso in the past few weeks. One Board member indicated that the reasons behind it were unclear, as it could not be fully explained by habitual variables such as the generalized depreciation of the dollar in the world markets, the change in sovereign risk or commodity prices. He added that the topic had to be evaluated further, but one reasonable hypothesis was that the excessive growth in domestic output and demand could be translating into an exchange rate appreciation rather than into in ationary pressures. In this sense, the right thing to do was to continually analyze extreme risk scenarios, both internationally and domestically. One Board member noted that external borrowing conditions for Chile had remained favorable, which had translated, among other things, in the exchange rate appreciation. He also noted that, if external volatility remained bounded and international interest rates remained very low, the good outlook for the Chilean economy and the solid external position of its accounts favored capital in ows and the nancing of increased expenditure. He concluded that this could persist for a while. 
Regarding the monetary policy decision, all the Board members agreed that developments of the last month indicated that the most recommendable option was to hold the MPR at 5%. One Board member noted that the reduced volatility of nancial markets and the high commodity prices, in general, con gured a scenario that was favorable for Chile. At the same time, however, it was true that greater problems in Europe, which could occur shortly, or a sharper downward revision of the copper price, could cause a reversal of such favorable disposition towards the Chilean economy. Overall, he ended, in general terms, the situation was not very different from forecasts of recent months, and for as long as monetary policy was within a range that could be thought of as neutral, the strategy of holding the MPR constant was the right decision. In addition, he noted that the market had little by little consolidated the idea that the MPR could stay in a similar level to the current one for some time, and he agreed with this notion. 
One Board member considered that the arguments in favor of holding the MPR were fairly similar to those put forth in previous meetings. For one thing, the MPR was at a level that could be considered neutral and was consistent with the expected trajectories of medium-term in ation and output. In addition, the risks originating abroad seemed to be largely offset by those coming from the domestic scenario, reinforcing the convenience of keeping the policy rate at. 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member noted that, generally, the situation was no different from that of the last monetary policy meeting. Raising the MPR was out of the question in the current circumstances, both because of low in ation and its limited projections, and because the external scenario continued to pose substantial risks to the national economy. Lowering the MPR did not seem prudent, at least for as long as domestic output and demand did not give clear signs of a deceleration. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board members Marshall, Claro and Vial, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 5.0% (annual). 
