MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY 
MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 205 held on 12 December 2013. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board member; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Present the Minister of Finance, Felipe Larraín. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Kevin Cowan, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Claudio Raddatz, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Luis Opazo, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Advisory Department Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communications of Monetary Policy Manager; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Erika Arraño, acting Executive Secretary to the Governor’s Cabinet; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
2. Options 
On this occasion, with the data known after the last meeting, the Research Division presented as relevant options keeping the monetary policy rate (MPR) at 4.50% or lowering it by 25 basis points, to 4.25%. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
Information since the last meeting con rmed that the pace of growth of Chile ́s trading partners continued somewhat below its historical average, but a gradual recovery was expected in the coming quarters. This was grounded on the recovery of developed economies, especially the United States and the stabilization of emerging markets. Although the copper price remained at record highs, the cycle of mining investment continued to abate globally. International in ation was well contained in the developed economies and in most emerging ones. 
The nancial conditions facing emerging economies were still tighter than in previous years and early 2013, before the Fed’s signals about tapering. This phenomenon had affected the most vulnerable economies, while in Chile the impact had been limited. Local rms’ access to foreign funding was still relatively favorable by historic standards. In the last month, external nancial conditions had seen minor changes, even though the withdrawal of the Fed’s program was expected to begin soon. 
During 2013, the Chilean economy slowed down. Output was growing somewhat below trend, taking pressure off installed capacity utilization, while labor market conditions remained tight. The slowdown of domestic expenditure had permeated each of its components, including those with a rather inertial behavior. 
The projections contained in December’s Monetary Policy Report were consistent with output and demand growth remaining on a moderate trajectory for a few quarters as the economy accommodated the lower momentum coming from mining-related investment. Other components of demand, however, would likely continue to support growth. The nancial situation of consumers is healthy, as labor income is growing similarly to previous quarters and average con dence remains optimistic. Companies were working with tight capacity levels, and some sectors such as manufacturing indicated that they perceived lower-than- normal inventory levels. Public spending, according to the scal rule, should continue to increase in line with growth in structural revenues. 
Recent gures for in ation and private projections were consistent with in ation converging to the target. The recent depreciation of the peso could imply higher in ation in the short term, but it was a temporary phenomenon that had not affected medium-term expectations. 
Regarding the alternative of holding constant the MPR, it was justi ed in that the slowdown of the economy had been mild and it was expected to grow steadily in the coming quarters. In addition, two cuts had been made to the policy rate, 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
which were working and would continue to gradually affect the components of demand that were the most sensitive to credit costs. Credit was owing normally and steadily to households and rms. The peso had depreciated in real terms to near its historic average, which would also help rebalance the sources of growth in line with changes in the external environment and the maturity of the mining investment cycle. In this context, keeping the MPR would allow waiting for further information about the evolution of the economy and the effects of the reductions already made. 
As for the alternative of lowering the MPR, it was consistent with the trajectory of interest rates considered in the baseline scenario of the last Report, which examined the possibility of adding some extra monetary stimulus. While new data since the last meeting was in line with the baseline scenario, a third cut to the MPR could deliver a signal of greater urgency regarding the weakness of the national economy and lead to a further correction to the market’s expected rates, which diverted away from the scenario depicted in the Monetary Policy Report. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
All the Board members agreed that developments since the release of the December Monetary Policy Report were consistent with its baseline scenario and attested to its validity. 
Regarding the international scenario, the Board members noted that no major changes were visible and, if anything, news had a marginally more positive tone. They also noted that the markets were anticipating the start of the partial withdrawal of monetary stimuli in the United States, which had had a mild impact on U.S. interest rates and the value of the dollar. They observed that emerging markets had had a less volatile reaction to this outlook. One Board member said that an earlier start of the monetary stimulus withdrawal could be construed as good news, as it implied a stronger U.S. economy. Over the short term, however, the higher interest rates could be unwelcome by those economies depending more on external nancing. Overall, he added, even if unconventional monetary policy measures were withdrawn in the U.S. and other developed economies, in all likelihood their central banks would hold the interest rates low for still some time. This was a signi cant element in Chile’s relevant external scenario. 
Domestically, speaking about the GDP, all Board members observed that October’s Imacec increase had fallen short of the market’s expectations. Furthermore, weaker investment growth and inventory depletion were consolidating, while 
at the same time consumption was still growing, thanks to labor income and household credit availability, while con dence indicators were still optimistic. One Board member noted that y-o-y investment rates showed a sharper fall, although magni ed by the high basis for comparison of end-of- 2012. 
One Board member added that the deceleration of output and demand was a healthy development because, among other reasons, it had prompted a signi cant reduction in the current account de cit forecast for this year and next. Many factors —including the labor market’s situation, private consumption growth, the evolution of domestic credit, external lending in advantageous conditions, all-time high terms of trade and the recovery of inventories— did not foreshadow, in the baseline scenario, a sharp slowdown of the economy. Overall, he concluded, this situation called for close monitoring, because important risks persisted that could modify this diagnosis. 
All the Board members pointed out that although in ation in November had been somewhat higher than expected by the market, it had changed neither the analysts’ medium-term projections nor investors’ expectations, which remained near the target. One Board member noted that in ation had been affected most recently by the peso depreciation and the rise of some food prices. However, it was still below 3%. In addition, core in ation —which excludes food and energy— was still less than 2%, but was expected to return to the tolerance range and converge to the 3% target as soon as early 2014. He concluded that it was important to examine the trend gures and not one-time data. 
All the Board members stressed how the peso had depreciated since the last meeting. One Board member indicated that, beyond the natural volatility of these changes, it helped a much expected change in relative prices considering the foreseen scenario for both the global economy and Chile. He also noted that, although it might entail some higher-than-expected in ation gures in the coming months, it did not alter the interpretation of the economic cycle included in the Report, nor the medium-term outlook for in ation. Another Board member concurred to draw attention to the adjustment in relative prices that was taking place in the economy. He added that the counterpart should be a moderation of nominal wages. If, on the contrary, real wages remained very strong, offsetting the normalization of in ation via greater nominal adjustments, higher in ationary pressures would ensue. 
With respect to the monetary policy decision, all ve Board members agreed that the alternatives presented by the Research Division were the most plausible. One Board member noted that three cuts in a row could be wrongly construed as a sign of concern on the Board’s part over the pace of the domestic demand’s 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
adjustment. Moreover, a pause would buy time to gather more information and better assess the need for and timing of further adjustments to the MPR. 
One Board member said that the option of lowering the policy rate could be grounded in that there was still some room for monetary policy to accommodate the new conditions. If so, he felt it would be desirable to complete this process relatively soon. However, the picture had not changed in terms of either output or in ation, beyond very occasional surprises. A new cut would take the market by surprise, and a possible interpretation would be that the latest gures had led the Central Bank to reassess the current conditions, which was not in line with the analyses performed. 
One Board member noted that it was appropriate to keep the MPR at this time, because it was consistent with the diagnosis of the current economic situation and the recent Board communications, in particular the Monetary Policy Report. The option of a further cut this time would be warranted in case of a sharper slowdown and/or a lower in ation rate. In particular, a third consecutive reduction would send a message that would not be consistent with the economy’s observed moderate slowdown. Incidentally, this diagnosis should be continually evaluated in the coming months based on new incoming data. He added that it was also true that there was a sign in the Monetary Policy Report —in the working assumption that the MPR could be lowered later on— but it didn’t have to be at this meeting. The market was actually not expecting it. This Board member concluded that an unchanged policy rate was more compatible with the scenario of moderate slowdown with some still dynamic elements and two consecutive reductions, so pausing was the reasonable thing to do this time. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board members Marshall, Claro and Vial, to keep the annual monetary policy rate at 4.50%. 
