MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 217, held on 11 December 2014. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Enrique Marshall, Vice-Governor; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member.. 
Present the Finance Minister, Alberto Arenas. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
News received during the month, and the analysis presented during the coordination meetings relating to the December Monetary Policy Report depicted an external scenario that, while considering a moderate recovery of output over the next two years, was now less dynamic than previously thought. In that scenario, the divergence between the United States and most of the other developed economies was intensifying while at the same time emerging economies were looking weaker. Interest rates in the US were supposed to begin rising during the second half of 2015 while risk premiums would 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
remain somewhat above 2014’s averages. In this context, the copper price had dropped past the US$3 per pound mark, and was expected to remain close by. This reduced dynamism was offset, to some extent, by the stronger impulse coming from the fall in oil prices, which, coupled with lower prices for other commodities had also triggered downward revisions to the world in ation outlook. 
The adjustment of the price of oil—which had been transmitted to local prices, and would continue to do so faster than before because of an amendment to the price-stabilizing mechanism MEPCO—and gas, plus the reversal of some price hikes in some vegetables and fruits, had contributed to the zero in ation rate of November. Thus, expectations to December had settled in negative territory, which would permit to end the year with an in ation of 4.8%. The correction of nearly a full percentage point in two months would still leave in ation on a high level, but it certainly mitigated the risks of stronger second-round effects or a rise in medium-term expectations discussed in the options minutes of previous months. 
Nonetheless, it was important to recognize that behind the low in ation of November lied a core in ation indicator—the CPIEFE—that exceeded expectations at 4.3% in November. Core in ation had been unexpectedly high in a context where the peso had depreciated further and wages had been growing faster. Thus, the projections leading to the December Report estimated that in the last quarter of 2015 the CPIEFE would exceed the September forecast, despite the downward revision to the output and demand outlook. This change was largely due to the peso depreciation of recent months. 
This view of inflation came in contrast with some measures of market expectations, which suggested that the price variation would decrease more markedly during 2015. The median of the Financial Brokers Survey (FBS) showed annual in ation approaching 2% in twelve months’ time. Different results came from the Economic Expectations Survey (EES), where the median forecast for end-of-2015 was 2.9%. In the opinion of the Research Division, in a scenario where the peso had depreciated nearly 3.5% over the past month, where the economic slowdown, while sharp, had been gradual, and where labor-market gaps did not look too big, it was dif cult to foresee such a drop in in ation. Going forward, the recovery of projected output in 2015 was not consistent with greater downward pressures on in ation than had been foreseen in the debates surrounding the December Report. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Still, it was worth noting that in the present juncture—in the cross re of opposing effects from output and the exchange rate, because of signi cant uncertainty about the output gaps and the behavior of the world price of fuels—projecting in ation was a particularly complex task, as con rmed by the unusual dispersion of in ation forecasts. For example, out of the EES’s 60 respondents, 35% believed that in ation twelve months ahead would be 3% or higher, while 40% thought it would be 2.5% or less. This called for special caution when interpreting monthly in ation gures. 
Regarding output, partial fourth-quarter indicators (e.g., imports and retail sales) showed no signs of expenditure recovery. Slower growth in demand had occurred in a context where in every sector and contradicting internal expectations, business and consumer con dence had become more pessimistic. 
Projections in the new Monetary Policy Report indicated that the economy would grow more in 2015 than in 2014, but the worsened actual data, the not-so-strong international scenario and the prospect of a more limited spending led to correct downward the growth forecast. However, it was still believed that the rapid and signi cant adjustment the economy had made during 2014; the agents’ nancial position, which although less comfortable, was still perceived as satisfactory; the increase in public investment; and the presence of a signi cant monetary stimulus—which had resulted in improved credit conditions—con gured an environment conducive to the recovery of economic dynamism. This, provided that consumer and business con dence would improve in the near future. 
In this context, the need was con rmed to continue providing a signi cant monetary stimulus to the economy, and that the current monetary stimulus was consistent with the convergence of in ation to the desired levels within the usual projection horizon. Thus, the option to reduce the monetary impulse did not seem relevant in the present discussion. Moreover, the high and persistent level of in ation, the recent depreciation of the peso, the evolution of the labor market and the fact that it was unclear whether the economy needed to intensify the monetary stimulus, also led to rule out the option of further cuts. 
Accordingly, the Research Division presented as the only possible option to hold the MPR at 3%. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
On the external front, every Board member singled out, as the main piece of news, the substantial drop in the oil price. One Board member said that this would have varied effects across economies, but the net effect was positive for the world economy and very good for Chile. Still, he added, some of this effect would be balanced out with the drop, quite milder so far, in the price of copper. 
One Board member agreed that the lower price of crude oil would have positive macroeconomic effects globally, but could cause problems to the more oil- dependent economies such as Russia, Nigeria and Venezuela. In the region, he added, it could have an impact on Colombia and Ecuador. This would couple with the situation of Argentina and Brazil, because keeping prices low for a long time could delay their economic recovery, given the importance that present and potential investments had gained in the development of high-cost energy projects. He added that one could not rule out that this new scenario could cause nancial contagion to other emerging economies dependent on commodities and banks and companies exposed to the energy sector. Therefore, he concluded, future developments in this area should be carefully monitored. 
One Board member stressed that the sharp decline in oil prices seemed to originate, in essence, in idiosyncratic supply-side factors in the industry, so no big corrections should be expected in the prices of other commodities. This was especially important in forecasting the copper price. Anyway, this was a phenomenon to be followed closely, since commodity prices had shown considerable volatility in the past few years. Therefore, the occurrence of nancial events could not be ruled out, which could alter the prices, at least temporarily. 
Locally, all the Board members agreed that there had been no major developments since the previous meeting. One Board member stressed that beyond the factors originating the cyclical movements of the economy, expectations had begun to play a key role, especially in the most recent conjuncture. This was evident in the sharp fall in business and consumer con dence indexes observed over the course of the year. 
About in ation, one Board member noted that the former diagnosis remained. The high annual records of recent months responded to temporary or one-time factors and these, in a context of weak demand, should adjust downwards and converge to the target. However, one should be aware that the recent 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
depreciation of the peso could mean that reaching the target would take longer than anticipated a few months ago. One Board member added that among the concerns about the future path of in ation, special attention had to be paid to the faster pace of wage growth. In his opinion, it was beginning to move away from productivity trends, which could become an obstacle for in ation adjustment and could pose a threat to job creation during the recovery phase. In his view, this phenomenon should be examined carefully in the coming months. 
One Board member noted that the recent behavior of in ation still left some questions open, which would clear up in time. On the one hand, core in ation had been higher than expected, putting a note of caution about actual and future in ation. There was also the large increase in nominal wages which, coupled with the still low unemployment rate, attested to a tighter labor market than the economic slowdown would suggest. This had to do, also, with the natural uncertainties surrounding the way to measure the output gap. And it had to be kept in mind that the increase in core in ation was related, to an important extent, to the depreciation of the peso, which had intensi ed in the days prior to the meeting. Of course this was a one-time effect, but there was the risk of it persisting for longer than expected. In fact, some of it had already taken place during 2014. In this sense, an annual in ation rate of 5.5% should not be underestimated, because such a level risked becoming persistent due to the widespread indexation of wages and other variables. He then commented that the sharp drop in oil prices was certainly very good news in ation-wise, but, as was normal in supply shocks, the policy reaction was less intense than when the shock came from the demand side. He recalled that in the past months our monetary policy had continued to expand, even with in ation well above the target, precisely because these were explained largely by supply-side disturbances. 
Turning to the medium-term scenario, one Board member noted that it assumed that the Chilean economy had undergone a process of signi cant adjustment in its external accounts and in its output and demand levels, which had had a strong echo in relative prices, mainly the real exchange rate. This had affected, also signi cantly, headline in ation. This scenario suggested that conditions existed for a modest recovery of GDP and demand, thanks to private investment that had stopped falling, and to expansionary macroeconomic policies, both monetary and scal. All this would be accompanied by a gradual return, from above, of CPI in ation to the target over the course of 2015.However, he added, this scenario contrasted in a way with what could be inferred from private expectations, which assumed a slower pace for the rebound of economic activity, lower in ation and consequently also room for additional monetary 
easing in the coming quarters. In that context, the balance of risks relating to the materialization of our baseline scenario was biased towards a slower recovery of growth—as re ected in market expectations. He nished by saying that this was a relevant divergence for explaining our view of the monetary policy scenario going forward. 
Regarding the monetary policy decision, all ve Board members agreed that the only plausible option was to keep the MPR at 3%. One Board member said that, beyond the MPR, it seemed to him that a more relevant topic to discuss at the time was the monetary policy bias. In his opinion, including a bias was justi ed primarily inasmuch as immediate actions were anticipated as part of a pre-de ned strategy. The baseline scenario of the December Report seemed not to suggest that this was the case, which was in a way consistent with maintaining a neutral bias. In any case, at this point it seemed more natural to rule out alternative scenarios that advised raising the MPR rather than lowering it. He also thought it was important to establish that including a bias at this meeting or not posed no restriction to monetary policy to react exibly to a sharp deterioration of internal or external conditions that could signi cantly reduce the outlook for medium-term growth and in ation in Chile. 
One Board member recalled that a couple of meetings back the Bank had announced the end of the process of lowering the policy rate, after a combined reduction of 200 basis points in one year. Since then, business prospects had deteriorated somewhat, while in ation had been unexpectedly high. Although falling oil prices would foster a decline in in ation in the coming quarters, this was a once-and-for-all effect. Thus, he believed that the proper assessment of in ation dynamics and of the impact of the currency depreciation, in a context of sluggish demand and output, were crucial to determine the path of the MPR going forward. In his opinion, the information at hand continued to con rm that the MPR was in a rather expansionary level, consistent with in ation stabilizing around 3% by 2016. This, considering the state of labor market indicators and the uctuations of relative prices that would continue to challenge the economy in the quarters ahead. 
One Board member noted that it was dif cult to propose any policy option other than holding the MPR at. To raise it was out of the question and to lower it had no grounds with the information available. The decision to hold it, however, was consistent with a picture that contemplated slight adjustments downward in growth, but at the same time entailed a short-term in ation trajectory where risks had not disappeared entirely. In addition, the MPR was now in a suf ciently expansionary level, consistent with the state of the cycle. 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member noted that monetary policy had been accommodated to the phase of the cycle facing the Chilean economy. The MPR had been cut drastically down to 3%, which left it at a level that implied a signi cant monetary stimulus. Long-term interest rates were still at record lows. The Central Bank’s medium- term outlook assumed that in ation expectations were well anchored around the target. Shorter-term expectations, while also important, were more volatile and affected by one-time events like the drop in the oil price. Despite all the uncertainties, he added, it still held that in ation should decline in the coming months and cross into the tolerance range during the second quarter of next year. Thus, he said, it was obvious that leaving the MPR unchanged was the only plausible option. Raising it con icted with the cycle, and lowering it with this level of in ation seemed unreasonable, as the MPR was clearly expansionary and there was the risk of high in ation persisting for longer than expected. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marshall, and Board members Claro, Vial and García, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3%. 
