MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary Policy Meeting No. 253, held on 14 December 2017. 
Present: Mario Marcel, Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member; Rosanna Costa, Board member. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Markets Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Mauricio Álvarez, Chief Counsel of Legal Services; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; María José González, Advisor of the Finance Ministry; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Carlos Medel, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background minutes and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
The discussion leading to the Monetary Policy Report (the Report) of December, which had been presented a few days before this meeting, had rati ed most of the scenario analyzed during the November meeting. Perhaps the only difference was that now the short-term scenario for in ation looked unbiased and not downward biased as it did in the September Report. This situation, however, did not lessen the concern about low rates of in ation in the short term, because in the current context, the costs associated with this type of deviations outweighed those of upward deviations. Since the statistical closing of the December Report, incoming news had been in line with the analysis therein. It had to be noted that, in the opinion of the Research Division, although greater volatility was seen in 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
some items of core in ation (CPIEFE: CPI excluding foods and energy), this had not affected its dynamics. In particular, the evolution of the EFE component, discounting some items that had shown unusual variations, was in line with forecasts, and consistent with that of the exchange rate, the capacity gaps and the usual indexation. 
The evolution of the real interest rates of the Central Bank’s papers drew attention, because since September they had risen between 55 and 75 basis points (bp) depending on the maturity. The increase in real rates had been cause for concern in past meetings, partly because it had been associated with the materialization of the risk of lower in ation expectations. Regarding this phenomenon there were two relevant questions to be asked. 
First, what portion of the movement of BCU rates re ected a tightening of the overall nancial conditions of the economy and what portion something peculiar of the bond market. The evidence and analysis of the Financial Markets Division suggested that a signi cant part of the change owed to changes in Pension Fund portfolios, which due to their high market share ampli ed the movements of the rates. Actually, the equivalent swap rates had posted milder movements. In addition, the BCUs moved in a context where consumer and commercial lending rates had declined and corporate bond spreads had adjusted downwards by 10 to 20bp. Thus, at least for the time being, these higher BCU rates had not been transmitted as intensely to other market rates, which had increased, incidentally, especially for longer terms. Moreover, although breakeven in ation had decreased, other measures of in ation expectations at 12 and 24 months had not changed from September but showed some rises with respect to the last meeting, as was re ected in the Financial Brokers Survey (FBS), the Economic Expectations Survey (EES) and premium-adjusted bonds. However, it was important not to ignore that some measures of in ation expectations at 24 months had been below 3% for quite a long time. 
Secondly, it was necessary to analyze whether the increase in the long rates — even correcting the BCU’s sharper reaction— was consistent with the evolution of the economy. In this regard, it should be noted that during the last few months the long market rates had been somewhat below those derived from the baseline scenarios of the latest Reports. This difference had been attributed to both the markets’ lower growth vision and the particularly low long-term external rates. In this context, it was expected that as the market converged to a growth scenario similar to that of the Bank, the long-term market rates would also rise. Moreover, additional upward pressure was expected, associated with the expected increase in external long-term rates. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
What had occurred since September? The market outlook for Chile’s growth had improved and was in line with the Bank’s projections for 2017 and 2018, and the ten-year rate in the United States had risen slightly less than 20bp. Although it was dif cult to quantify the true impacts of these events on the local long-term rate, they were consistent with a rise in longer-term rates in the context of the Bank’s baseline scenario, which had been con rmed by actual data. 
In this context, where both the baseline scenario and the main risks identi ed in the Report were still present, the Research Division considered that the options proposed in the previous months were still the right ones, i.e., holding the monetary policy rate (MPR) at 2.5% or trimming it by 25 bp to 2.25% with a downward bias, for the same reasons that had been explained at the earlier meetings. 
Leaving the MPR where it was at the moment was consistent with the monetary policy strategy associated with the Report’s baseline scenario and with the fact that the new data gleaned since then had been in line with its analysis. Against this option was the risk that the aforementioned increase in Central Bank bond rates would end up passing through to other rates, tightening nancial conditions in a context of weak activity. In addition, the baseline scenario assumed that beyond the movement of some measures of medium-term in ation expectations, they remained well anchored. However, it should be recognized that important doubts surrounded both the measurement of in ation expectations and their impact on the price formation process. This, given the costs associated with downward deviations in in ation in the current context, implied that it was necessary to watch closely the evolution of in ation expectations and other developments that could alter the medium-term convergence of in ation to the target. 
The option to boost the monetary stimulus relied mainly on the risk management arguments for the convergence of in ation that had been brought up in earlier meetings and in the December Report. Against it, it had to be recognized that policy actions based on risk scenarios rather than changes in the baseline projections were more dif cult to communicate. In addition, the market was still expecting an economic recovery, which, together with a clear signal that the MPR would not begin normalization until the economy showed a more solid rebound, limited the negative effects of lower in ation expectations on the price formation process. Therefore, to actually recover the growth pace continued to be a crucial element for the convergence of in ation, both because of its effect on the closing of the gap and because of the interaction between negative surprises in activity and still low in ation expectations. 
2. Monetary policy decision3/ 
On the recent evolution of inflation, several Board members noted that November’s CPI had not surprised the market, nor had it been out of line with internal projections. Some Board members noted that the risk scenarios for inflation that had been identified in the Report had not occurred, notwithstanding certain movements in the measures of in ationary dispersion. One Board member mentioned that although November’s in ation had been in line with expectations, this did not change the deviation accumulated in previous months. In his view, recent data suggested that the earlier price shocks were permeating the indicators of core in ation. He added that if the recent effects of particularly volatile prices, including those of tourism and shared facilities expenses, were discounted from the CPIEFE, its annual variation would be 1.6%. This, he said, led to an expected trajectory for core in ation that would remain below 2% at least until mid-2018, converging to the target at a slower pace than headline CPI. 
Turning to in ation expectations, several Board members agreed that no major changes could be observed. One Board member said that, if anything, compared to news while writing the Report, most measures showed a smaller difference with respect to the target. One Board member added that although the evolution of expectations had not worsened, some maintained a gap with the in ation target, adding that although this situation could not be labeled as a de-anchoring, it still had to be monitored closely. 
As for activity and its prospects, several Board members agreed that October’s Imacec rati ed a still fragile recovery in non-mining GDP, although without signi cant deviations from the expected trajectory. One Board member noted that projections for non-mining GDP indicated that the activity gap was still widening in the margin and that it would not begin to close before the second half of 2018. Therefore, he added, it was important to stress that the dynamism of activity that was projected towards the middle of next year depended on investment growth recovering and consumption remaining strong, which depended on the behavior of the labor market. One Board member noted that the external sector should help to consolidate the recovery process, consistently with the greater dynamism of all exports —not only mining— that had been observed for some months already. However, he continued, the evolution of the labor market had been and would continue to be very important in sustaining consumption. The 
3/ In order to preserve the regulatory individual anonymity in the discussion, all ve Board members are herein referred to as males, including female member Ms. Rosanna Costa. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
trend in expectations remained favorable, although expectations at more than a year were the ones that had rst crossed the barrier of pessimism, and should consolidate brie y. One Board member said that in his mind what was most signi cant was that there was still no concrete circumstantial evidence that the expected closing of the gaps or the convergence of in ation to more normal levels was taking place. He actually believed that the news since the last meeting indicated that there were options to move away from that scenario. He pointed out that some indicators of economic perception had experienced a setback or a stagnation in their rate of improvement, particularly the opinion of households on whether or not to buy vehicles, household items or a home, which had been the elements that had actually driven expectations lately. 
One Board member added that there was no big change abroad with respect to the forecasts in the Report, which was good news because a favorable scenario for the Chilean economy was taking shape. In fact, he added, the most important thing had been the Fed meeting, which had raised the rate as expected, and had given a message to the future that had been mostly interpreted as continuity with the previous vision, but with a tone of moderation, which was one of the risk factors in the Report’s baseline scenario. Another Board member noted that external conditions remained positive for the Chilean economy, with even some marginal improvements. 
Several Board members agreed that the nancial conditions were still good. One of them stated that background indicators showed that the rise of the bonds’ real rates that had been occurring for some months, was rather linked to the impact that changes in the portfolios of institutional investors had on these bonds’ prices. Moreover, this had not been transmitted substantially to consumer and commercial lending rates, which, on the contrary, had decreased. He added that although some longer rates had been adjusted upwards, they did so also as growth expectations improved, which in fact had come closer to the growth forecast in the September Report. In addition, credit surveys also failed to re ect any credit constraints. However, he concluded, it was necessary to take a closer look at these signals and be able to advance in differentiating the impact of each of these variables, as well as the effects of the evolution of external rates. One Board member said that while asset prices and the dollar parity had uctuated signi cantly in recent weeks, it was dif cult to assess how much of those changes would persist after the ballotage, so it made little sense to include them in the monetary policy analysis. Another Board member noted that the nancial market continued to offer favorable conditions to both consumers and rms. He added that, in any case, after the rst electoral round the markets had been highly volatile, making it dif cult to anticipate how the exchange rate and nancial conditions would behave in the coming weeks. This coupled with the 
impact on some asset prices of the change in the composition of the pension fund portfolios. One Board member noted that in the last month many factors had combined, such as the drop in stock prices —which had begun to fall before the rst election—, higher real long-term rates, a peso depreciation and signi cant lack of liquidity in the money market in dollars, which he thought pointed to tighter nancial conditions. If all or some of these phenomena persisted, he felt that the usual lags with which the markets operated should lead to a tightening of the lending conditions facing households and businesses. 
Some Board members indicated that, in their opinion, the market’s interpretation of the announced future orientation of the monetary policy was tighter than they would have expected given the importance of the downside risks in in ation described in the Report. This was re ected, for example, in expectations that pointed almost without dispersion to the MPR being kept unchanged at this meeting. In the opinion of one of them, it was necessary to add an unequivocal message of a downward bias in the MPR. 
Regarding the monetary policy decision, one Board member noted that, over all, the most recent events were not alien to the baseline scenario, and the prospects for in ation essentially remained in the terms presented in the latest Report. In this scenario, the option to hold the MPR dominated over the option to lower it by 25bp. First, because without deviations from the baseline scenario, having in ation of 3% at two years was consistent with keeping the MPR at 2.5%, at least until the gaps began closing as estimated in the published scenarios. Second, because no risks had materialized on in ation, which, in any case, would remain near the oor of the tolerance range for several months. However, it was still necessary to reiterate and clearly emphasize that particular attention was being paid to shocks that could compromise its convergence in the medium term and, speci cally, the in ationary pass-through and wage evolution would be an integral part of the analysis. Third, because based on the above, holding the MPR constant was naturally consistent with the Bank’s messages to the market. 
One Board member said that the option of lowering the MPR seemed reasonable if observed from the standpoint of the systematicity of monetary policy in a context of low in ation and still weak activity. In fact, he considered that the MPR should now be at 2%. He said he did not believe that electoral issues made it necessary to wait; if anything, the most recent context established a more restrictive nancial tone and, therefore, more disin ationary than in last month. In addition, politics would be part of the scene for several months, and should not be a reason for inaction. Finally, it was important to emphasize that, although lowering the MPR could challenge the recent Report’s estimates, he saw no big risks in it. 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member said that, in his opinion, the analysis published in the Monetary Policy Report a few weeks before were still in force, both with respect to the baseline scenario and the need to carefully observe possible deviations of in ation that could delay the convergence to the target. As the latest gures matched the Report’s baseline scenario, he thought that on this occasion the right thing to do was to keep the MPR at 2.5% and issue a press release in consistency with the Report. 
One Board member said that having to opt between holding the MPR or lowering it by 25bp, the important thing was to assess the extent to which the risks identi ed by the Board had materialized or could do so in the near future or if, instead, they had cleared up. He added that in his opinion the latter had not occurred and that the arguments for reducing the MPR to avoid the risk scenario foreseen in the Report were still valid, especially from the perspective of guiding the market in a period of particular uncertainty regarding the evolution of prices and the activity gap, as 2018 could be. However, he also believed that the Board should avoid confusing the market in this moment of uncertainty. In these circumstances, he preferred to reserve the option of an adjustment for when some of the factors that had been affecting the markets in recent weeks would dissipate. Thus, he voted to keep the MPR at 2.5% this time. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel and Board members Vial, García and Costa, to hold the monetary policy rate at 2.5%. 
