MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 241, held on 13 December 2016. 
Present: Mario Marcel, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Rodrigo Valdés. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policy Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
The analysis underlying the December Report implied the following: In the external scenario, somewhat tightened nancial conditions, combined with better terms of trade and an outlook for world activity that had behaved in line with expectations, should provide an impulse to the local economy not very different from that in the September forecast. However, the probability of deviations from that scenario had increased and added more uncertainty to the projections. In particular, the probability of not-so-favorable scenarios for the emerging economies had increased. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
Domestically, although local nancial conditions had improved with respect to the marked deterioration observed at the previous meeting and were still attractive by historic standards, they had tightened over the recent months. 
Estimates for the year were that activity would slow down some, due mainly to the poor performance of the mining sector. The evolution of other sectors did not differ much from projections, but the low Imacec of the month had raised some red ags. Given the volatility of the series and that demand-related variables were behaving as expected, it was dif cult to infer any signi cant change in the economy’s growth trend based only on that single piece of information. However, still depressed economic expectations, a more uncertain macro scenario, somewhat tighter medium-term nancial conditions and the slowdown in the latest gures, triggered a slight downward revision to the 2017 growth forecast. However, expectations continued to include a recovery of growth rates towards potential by the end of 2017 which, however, was in itself a factor of uncertainty. 
The in ation forecast placed it at the lower part of the tolerance range, driven by a considerable drop in EFE in ation (excluding foods and energy). Into the medium term, the in ation dynamic was seen as stable from September, largely because there had been no reevaluation of the output gap. 
In this context, it was reasonable for monetary policy’s general orientation not to change much. In other words, it was necessary to continue to provide a monetary impulse to the economy, which would be undone as conditions normalized. Accordingly, the analysis implied that the combination of lower in ation and somewhat weaker activity lately suggested that the right thing to do was to consider an additional 50-bp cut over the following months, which, incidentally, matched the market’s expectations. 
Thus, the relevant options for this meeting were to cut 25 bp off the rate, taking it to 3.25%, or leave it where it was, while communicating a downward bias. The virtues of either choice had to do with the convenience of having a more or less front-loaded trajectory for the interest rate, a discussion that in the opinion of the research Division had to be framed within the analysis of the risk balance and associated risks. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
The option of lowering the policy rate was based on the fact that, as could be inferred from sensitivity analyses performed for the Report, deviations from the baseline scenario where a stronger monetary impulse was required had become more likely, so the trajectories that anticipated cuts left the Bank on a better stand to deal with such scenarios. The cost was that, if conditions improved, part of the stimulus would have to be undone faster, especially if it compromised the convergence of in ation. This risk seemed small, however, considering that the in ation trajectory was expected to stand in the lower part of the tolerance range for an extended period of time. Furthermore, as had been mentioned before, the Bank had the capacity to reverse the course of monetary policy if required, counteracting the increase in the monetary impulse with a more resolute action in the opposite direction in the future. Against this option was that the market, while expecting a more expansionary policy going forward, foresaw no change at this meeting, which posed a certain risk for the communication. 
Keeping the rate at 3.5% was also consistent with the baseline projection scenario, which estimated a loosening of the monetary impulse in the months to come, but not necessarily at the current meeting. Moreover, because the levels of the rate were low at the moment, pausing to await new information could be useful and should not generate any big problem. Finally, this option would not take the market by surprise, as it expected no movements this time around. Against this option was that if nally the scenario came true where, in order to ensure the convergence of in ation, a stronger stimulus was required, doing nothing at this meeting risked falling behind the curve. Anyway, if the option to keep the rate unchanged was deemed the most appropriate, it was important to communicate that, although the projections hadn’t changed, the baseline scenario assumed a lower trajectory than the one outlined in the September Report, which matched the market’s expectation. This was important, since in the present context, to generate a rise in the interest rate curve seemed unwise. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
On the external front, one Board member noted that the baseline scenario assumed that Chile would face more dangerous external conditions. In his view, what caused this negative bias was the perception that the US scal stimulus would force the Federal Reserve (Fed) to tighten monetary policy, which was beginning to re ect in the upward interest rate trajectory estimated by the market. This would translate into more negative conditions facing emerging 
countries. He said he tended to agree with this view, but with one important caveat: it was also possible that the aforesaid trends would take some time before actually resulting in higher interest rates, where a more benign external scenario over the projection scenario was possible. He added that, for Chile, whatever happened with the price of copper was essential, as at least in the short term it tended to behave like any nancial asset price and was critically dependent on economic agents’ expectations. If these prices were stable for a few weeks and there were no signi cant changes in interest rates, a somewhat more positive global scenario could be con gured, at least in 2017. Of course, a more aggressive message from the Fed at its December meeting could radically alter this picture. 
One Board member pointed out that after several weeks marked by major movements in the nancial markets, this meeting allowed taking a closer look at the outcome of the US election and its effects on emerging economies. He noted that, on the one hand, the vision of a rate hike in the United States had been consolidated, which evidently should be endorsed by the Fed at its ongoing meeting. However, he added, the most important thing was that it could not be ruled out that the Fed would further normalize the interest rate at a slightly faster than anticipated pace. This, in response to an economy that had given new signs of dynamism and where medium-term in ationary pressures appeared to have increased. This had also contributed to a signi cant appreciation of the dollar in global markets. On the other hand, he continued, the increase in commodity prices had been long-lasting and the risk premiums of emerging countries had declined in the margin—though still somewhat above their levels of the previous month—, and capital continued to ow out of emerging countries. Overall, there were some signs of deteriorating nancial conditions in emerging economies, but in his view, the world growth outlook had stabilized and there was obviously much uncertainty surrounding these developments. 
One Board member stressed that, although the early reactions to the American election outcome had waned in recent weeks, the prevalence of higher uncertainty and prospects of a change in the policy mix the US had generated more restrictive nancial conditions than had been foreseen in the latest Report. In his opinion, the impact of these changes on the Chilean economy naturally depended on the degree to which the higher external interest rates were transferred to the local nancial market, and from there to rms and consumers. In any case, he added, the levels of indebtedness of some agents, compensated so far by low credit costs, made them more vulnerable to a shift towards more stringent nancial conditions. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
About the local economy, one Board member indicated that incoming information offered several readings. Although in ation had brought no signi cant surprises in November, activity indicators were contradictory. On the one hand, the negative annual variation of the October Imacec had been strongly in uenced by a big negative surprise in mining, but also by quite widespread declines in other sectors. On the other hand, data more closely linked to the evolution of nal demand, such as durable goods sales, imports and bank loans, suggested a stabilization of the previous growth rate, or even some marginal acceleration. Labor market data, in turn, showed a continuation of previous trends: employment growth was concentrated on self-employment and wages continued to decelerate slowly, in line with the usual indexation patterns. 
One Board member noted that the local market had undone part of the rise in long-term rates observed a few weeks back, a downward correction of short- term nominal rates and a stock market spike. In his view, this, together with the exchange rate trajectory and the increase in the copper price, could be anticipating good news in the near future. For the same reason, he believed that the information that these movements in asset prices could contain should not be overlooked. However, he continued, there were good reasons to underestimate much of that information in the current circumstances. Among others, it was dif cult to justify the rise in the copper price, so the downward correction in the Report’s baseline scenario was adequate. Activity gures, in turn, were mixed, and some had weakened further, warranting greater caution regarding the pace of Chile’s economic recovery towards 2017. Meanwhile, the faster decline of in ation could also be re ecting that the exchange rate effect depended to a large extent on the state of the economic cycle, and, therefore, he did not rule out that the faster drop in in ation could be a re ection of this greater weakness. 
About the monetary policy decision, all ve Board members agreed that the options proposed were the right ones. One Board member believed that a boost to the monetary stimulus was now clearly more necessary than in previous months. The conjunction of an economy growing below trend and an appreciated real exchange rate were generating unambiguous disin ationary pressures. This was consistent with the upcoming Report’s baseline projection that considered an MPR cut of up to 50 basis points. The question, he added, was about the timing of such an adjustment. In his opinion, the changes in the trajectories foreseen for growth and in ation were signi cant and persistent enough to warrant an interest rate trajectory below that considered in the previous Report. Therefore, he felt that the option of lowering the MPR at this meeting obviously dominated, and for consistency sake, it was necessary to act in that direction. 
In addition, market expectations already gave clear signals of an imminent MPR cut, so lowering it at this Meeting would not be a total surprise, nor did it make it necessary to include a bias in the communication before actually moving the policy rate. As the risks associated with this decision were obviously biased in one direction and there was no sign of a break in the process of disin ation and slow growth—in fact, events had rather struck in the opposite direction—, failure to act at this meeting increased the probability of having to do so more aggressively in the coming months, so he was in favor of lowering the policy rate. 
One Board member stressed that the baseline projection scenario in the upcoming Report would not change signi cantly its assumed in ation and longer-term growth trajectories. Furthermore, the risk balance suggested that the probability of having a more unfavorable global scenario for Chile than what could be inferred from recent data had increased. He said that he agreed that this was quite likely, but he thought it dangerous to act preventively when it was also quite likely that the global situation would improve over the coming months. All in all, he felt that the option of keeping the MPR had clear advantages. Among others, because it was already low and providing a signi cant stimulus. This allowed waiting for new information before evaluating at least two important elements. First, whether October’s activity data revealed a change in trend or an anomaly; second, whether global nancial conditions remained, the copper price included. He added that if the Report’s baseline scenario came true, with a lower copper price and more unfavorable external conditions, together with a very slow recovery of domestic activity in the next few months, a possible MPR cut in the coming months would be justi ed. However, this was conditional on the actual materialization of this scenario, which would be clari ed brie y. 
One Board member pointed out that the sum of these precedents, including the baseline scenario of the upcoming Report, led to consider the possibility of an MPR reduction more clearly. This, given the weak prospects for recovery and their impact on in ation. In his view, the magnitude and timing of an MPR adjustment depended crucially on new information and its in ationary effects going forward. In any case, with the information at hand and data assumed in the Report, the current outlook suggested that, for now, there was limited room for an MPR reduction. 
One Board member noted that the options to hold constant or lower the MPR had already been in the discussions since September, based on the in ation trajectory being below the latest Report’s forecast, and coupled at this point with considerably lower than projected activity gures in October. This led to 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
foresee a weaker economy for the last quarter of 2016 and the rst quarter of 2017, as well as core in ation remaining close to 2% during the better part of 2017. In his view, although the feasibility of growth accelerating over the course of 2017 and in ation converging to the target by early 2018 had not changed, the changes were suf cient to materially modify projections for the whole of the next year. Likewise, the timing and vigor of that recovery were subject to the risk scenarios facing the Chilean economy, which were linked to the behavior of labor and nancial markets. About the former, it should be noted that while investment explained much of the slowdown in domestic demand of recent years, consumption had been a contributor, thanks to moderate but sustained growth in the wage bill. However, in the face of a new economic deceleration, a further worsening of the labor market could not be ruled out, with consequences on consumption, demand and activity. On the external front, although the possibility of better terms of trade had increased because of a higher copper price, the scenario for the Chilean economy in 2017 looked less favorable than estimated in September’s Report. This combined with a more downward-oriented risk scenario, which, if materialized, would mean postponing the closing of the output gap again and the divergence in the in ation trajectory. Under these circumstances, he added, although it was prudent to maintain the MPR at this meeting, it seemed to him equally prudent to communicate that, if the trends envisioned were con rmed, particularly with regard to the in ation trajectory, an additional monetary impulse would be necessary. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Claro and Board Member Vial, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3.5%. Board member García voted in favor lowering it by 25 basis points. 
