MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING 
Monetary policy meeting No. 229, held on 17 December 2015. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member; Mario Marcel, Board member. 
Present the Deputy Finance Minister, Alejandro Micco. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policy Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department. Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information—which this time was summarized in the December 2015 Monetary Policy Report—and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website 2/. 
News received since the last monetary policy meeting, as well as the analysis in the December Report, indicated that the scenario depicted in the previous Report, with stronger short-term (but milder medium-term) in ationary pressures, had intensi ed. In the short term, core in ation had been higher than forecast, in a context where the peso had depreciated, output gaps were still bounded—as suggested by the evolution of the labor market—and historic patterns of indexation remained in place. In this context, services in ation— CPIEFE services—was still high, with no signs of any upcoming correction, 
http://www.bcentral.cl/en/faces/pmonetaria/reuniones 
while higher goods in ation—CPIEFE goods—, closely linked to the exchange rate, continued to explain the greatest part of the increase in in ation of recent quarters. 
Meanwhile, the growth outlook of 2016 had been revised downward after the September Report, largely due to the worsened external scenario, where trading partners’ growth had been adjusted down somewhat and the global nancial conditions facing emerging economies had deteriorated further, all in an environment of clearly deteriorated terms of trade. 
In this scenario, the projection for core in ation was revised upward mainly because of higher in ation expected for the earlier months of next year, while for end-of 2016 and the turn of 2017 somewhat lower in ation velocities were foreseen. The recent drop in fuel prices and the reduced contribution of foodstuffs had also played a part in containing in ation. However, the baseline scenario projected that in ation would come down from 4% only by the end of 2016, remaining high during the rst months of the year. 
In this context of weak growth, and despite the high prevailing in ation, it was reasonable for monetary policy to continue to contribute to the economy’s recovery by staying in expansionary territory. However, in line with in ation having been higher and more persistent than expected, monetary policy should be made some degrees less expansionary than at present, to ensure convergence of in ation with the target within the forecast horizon. 
In broad terms, this analysis did not differ much from the estimations in the September Report, except that the higher expected and actual short-term core in ation had made it advisable to partially anticipate the reduction of the monetary stimulus. Anyway, in real terms the MPR was still low. Furthermore, if it behaved as considered in the Report’s working assumption, the real MPR would be unequivocally below the levels considered neutral during the whole forecast horizon, consistently with the weak growth scenario depicted in the baseline scenario. 
The Research Division’s analysis also suggested that risks for activity were mainly biased downward. On one hand, the external scenario had become more complex, especially for the emerging world, as the prices of commodities— copper included—were expected to remain low for longer, plus not-so-favorable nancial conditions. On the other hand, con dence indicators were still pessimistic with no signs of improvement, even though economic growth seemed to be stabilizing (but in a low level) and the labor market continued to exhibit a 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
signi cant degree of resilience. About this, a faster correction could not be ruled out, with its resulting negative effects on in ation, consumption and activity. 
In this context, the Research Division proposed the options of either keeping the MPR at 3.25% or raising it by 25 basis points (bp), to 3.5%. The rst option relied on the presence of downward risks in output and the possibility of waiting for new information. However, there were several arguments in favor of raising the policy rate. First, taking it to 3.5% was the most consistent action with the baseline scenario described in the December Report. Second, alternative simulations where the economy grew somewhat less than estimated in the baseline scenario for various reasons suggested that to achieve the in ation convergence, an additional reduction, albeit smaller, of the monetary stimulus was needed. Third, although this time the market was divided with respect to this meeting’s decision, an increase would be no surprise. And nally, an increase in annual in ation was expected during the rst months of 2016 that would place it a little above the market’s expectations, which advised against delaying an increase that was very likely to be implemented. 
About the bias, the decision was not so obvious. On one hand, if a similar trajectory to the working assumption of the Report was to be pursued, the rst MPR increase after December would be farther between meetings than those adopted in recent months, so keeping the bias of the latest communication might signal a faster than expected reduction in the monetary stimulus. On the other hand, a neutral bias could give the impression that the current interest rate expectations were not being validated, and these were very similar to those input in the December Report’s forecasts. In this context, the Research Division suggested to maintain an upward bias, but to make some reference to the fact that the next hike would take longer. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
On the external front, one Board member noted that there had been important developments, which were partly related to the materialization of the much awaited policy rate increase by the Federal Reserve Board (Fed). Among them, he singled the strengthening of the dollar around the world out and the sharp drop in the prices of oil and copper. About the region, he drew attention to the unremitting deterioration of the Brazilian economy, and to the fact that the new Argentine Administration had begun normalizing and adjusting its economic policies, which would facilitate its reintegration to the world’s nancial markets, but which in the short term posed major challenges. 
One Board member said that, no doubt about it, the most signi cant piece of news coming from abroad was the start of the interest rate normalization in the United States, which the markets seemed to have taken calmly. This was certainly an observation made with insuf cient data, and he could not rule out that the volatility of recent months surrounding this decision and the Fed’s normalization process could continue on and therefore it was a process that called for close follow-up. He added that, generally speaking, the peso had remained stable for several weeks already, near $700 per dollar, while commodity prices had made a new downward adjustment. In the baseline scenario, this drop should be quite prolonged. 
One Board member noted that news from abroad was varied: the policy rate hike in the US, the downgrading of Brazil, the changes in Argentina, and the further decline in commodity prices, among others. Many of them had been anticipated, some not so much, but overall they pulled down the external outlook. He added that it would be premature to forecast the effects of the rate increase in the US, but its widespread prior diffusion had helped mitigate the effects, at least so far. However, an increase in volatility could not be ruled out. 
About the domestic economy, several Board members noted that incoming data con rmed the scenario described in the September Report, where the feeble economic growth persisted and in ation remained for some time above the tolerance range. In it, for in ation to converge to the target, gradual and prudent monetary policy normalization was necessary, holding on to its expansionary orientation to enable the recovery of economic growth. That scenario also depicted a risk balance that was downward biased for output and upward biased for in ation in the short term. 
One Board member said that, during the last quarter, the risk scenarios in the September Report had materialized and the new Report’s outlook acknowledged this reality, framed in worsened external conditions. He added that, since no domestic or external factors were observed that could provide additional momentum to the economy in the short term, the baseline scenario’s projections had the growth estimate for 2016 adjusted downward. Moreover, risks persisted of a further slowdown in the short term, such as new declines in the copper price, slower growth of the main trading partners and still depressed expectations. Accordingly, in the baseline scenario the output gap, while bounded, widened at the margin and could continue to do so in the face of the negative risk scenario. At this point, it could not be assured that the resilience observed so far in the labor market would continue. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
About in ation, one Board member noted that short term projections had been raised. However, the risk balance tended to neutrality. In contrast with September’s scenario, the exchange rate path, while volatile, had moderated further in the last three months. If the effect of the Fed’s policy rate hike had actually been internalized already by the markets, and the dollar remained stable or increased little in the international markets, pressures on the Chilean peso would be reduced, and so would the impact on in ation. If the output gap widened, the impact of cost-push pressures on prices would ease. A risk scenario of more bounded growth would also moderate the wage dynamics. In fact, in the latter case it was doubtful that the resilience observed so far in the labor market could be kept. In addition, the Administration had given clear signs regarding the scal policy stance—which had turned somewhat less expansionary than in the previous period—and, also, of a substantial moderation of wage adjustments in the public sector. Finally, if the current scenario for the oil market was maintained, it was likely that the signi cant declines observed in recent times would continue, thus in uencing the fuel prices in Chile. 
One Board member noted that the evidence continued to show that, while the prices of those goods more closely linked to the exchange rate had risen signi cantly, which was expected to ease in case it stabilized, the in ation gures more closely related to services and domestic pressures continued to post signi cant increases, with no visible reaction to the slow economic growth. Incidentally, at this point the labor market’s trajectory stood out, where the dynamism of employment and wages had not contributed to a substantial drop in nontradables in ation. Thus, the in ation outlook continued to be, in general terms, similar to the one outlined in recent months: while short-term forecasts remained high, even above the market’s, and some risks continued to rise over the short term, towards the medium term the factors warranting lower in ationary pressures were in full force. Furthermore, a steeper deceleration than portrayed in the baseline scenario was still possible, which could affect the dynamism of employment and generate a faster moderation of wage growth. There were different scenarios, of course, either because of a sharper or greater change in external nancial conditions, or of a deeper deterioration of domestic output and employment, which would certainly have rst-order implications. In his view, however, these more extreme scenarios should not be taken as important alternatives for the purposes of this meeting’s decision. 
One Board member stressed that, in November, annual in ation had momentarily returned to the tolerance range, but as soon as in December it would exceed it again and even continue to mount in the coming months. On this front, he said, risks were coming from the side of the exchange rate and the in ation 
persistence over the last period, in a context of bounded excess capacity. This, which could also be linked to a resilient labor market, would mean that in ation would take longer than previously projected to return to the target. In fact, core in ation for services continued to show high persistence. On the other hand, the drop in oil prices, plus a limited readjustment of public sector wages, coupled with a labor market that could lose momentum, were forces that would operate in the opposite direction. Output was somewhat lower because of a worsened external scenario, where the problems of Latin America stood out. However, although in the short term the GDP forecast was below potential and therefore the gap widened a little, its size and the relevant elasticities were not enough to generate a larger reduction in in ationary pressures reasonably soon. Obviously, should the economy enter a new further deceleration process, this could change. 
As for the monetary policy decision, all the Board members agreed that the two options put forward were plausible. One Board member noted that the question to ask this time was whether within the framework of a gradual adjustment of the MPR, it was preferable to take an additional step now—to ensure the materialization of the short- and medium-term baseline scenarios—or rather wait for new information about the evolution of the world economy and the behavior of the exchange rate before making any new adjustments. He added that, unfortunately, the next two measures would be marked by special situations. On one hand, December’s CPI variation would be in uenced by a low 12-month basis of comparison, while, on the other, January’s gure would be determined mainly by adjustments in managed prices. In his opinion, this would call for a special effort to discern the trends behind the traditional numbers and their policy implications, which could blur the fundamentals and the interpretation of an MPR adjustment. In this context, keeping the uncertainty about the monetary policy decisions could harm con dence, increase volatility and invite speculation on the Central Bank’s actions and motivations. For these reasons, he was for raising the MPR now by 25 basis points, to 3.5%, expressing clearly that such adjustment was part of the materialization of the baseline scenario. In his opinion, this would allow reducing the market’s uncertainty and strengthening the signal of a measured adjustment over the next 12 to 18 months. Such sign, he added, seemed particularly timely if in the coming months the uncertainty about the monetary policy orientation in the main economies was also reduced, as seemed to be occurring in China, the Eurozone and the United States. 
One Board member quali ed as remarkable that for the day’s meeting the opinions of analysts and survey respondents, as well as asset prices, were practically aligned with the monetary policy decision. In his view, this revealed that the decision was nely balanced, but in a general context where he saw 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
no signi cant differences. Actually, in the upcoming Monetary Policy Report it was suggested that by the end of the current cycle the MPR would stand near 4%. No change from September’s Report there, and it re ected that the effects of incoming news on the MPR trajectory tended to cancel out. He noted that, in this context, he had a marginal preference for raising the MPR, based mainly on the fact that the Report would reveal the monetary policy strategy associated with the baseline scenario for the coming quarters and, therefore, it would be prudent to operate with no un nished issues relating to the September Report. Accordingly, he added, this entailed communicating a more neutral bias, which was justi ed by two main reasons. One, because repeating the same bias of the last meeting would mean that external observers would rapidly infer that that speci c wording meant a hike every other meeting, an issue that was not part of the Report’s scenario. And two, the baseline scenario of the December Report projected increases towards the second quarter of 2016, a far enough horizon not to need stating a bias in the communication of any particular meeting. He thought that including a bias suggested—or should suggest—a fairly immediate movement in the policy rate. Under those same considerations, he saw good reasons to favor holding the MPR constant with a bias. If such strategy was chosen, it was possible to convey a pace of normalization of one hike every three to four meetings, which was pretty similar to the scenario outlined in the Report. However, this was quite a complex argument grounded in certain calm about the certainty in the communication of the next monetary policy actions, which was not so evident. However, he went on, both policy options were consistent with the rate ending the cycle at around 4% towards the end of 2016 and he leaned towards the option of raising the MPR this time around, with the communication being consistent with the December Report’s scenario. 
One Board member said he was in favor of raising the MPR by 25 basis points, mainly because of the unfavorable evolution of the in ation outlook. About the future movements of the MPR, he had no doubt that they should be upwards. About the bias, he thought that rather than necessarily refer to the movements of the coming months, it signaled the direction the MPR pointed at. Notwithstanding that, it was important to recognize that there were differences between the market’s projection for in ation in the coming months and the Bank’s forecast, suggesting that absent any signi cant surprise in the summer, it was reasonable to pause until new data allowed con rming the in ationary trend and acting accordingly. 
One Board member noted that the decision of this Meeting had two components: one relating to the monetary policy trajectory in the Report’s baseline scenario and the best timing for implementing the changes; the other was an exercise in 
risk assessment that adequately weighted possible alternative scenarios. In this sense, an increase of 25bp was consistent with a scenario in which in ation would remain high during the coming quarters, and was in line with the need to partly withdraw the strong monetary stimulus that had been maintained until now in a scenario of moderate growth. In his opinion, the short-term risks, with annual in ation bordering the 5% mark during the rst half of 2016, could be better dealt with using a proactive sign of the Bank regarding the challenge posed by this high in ation. An MPR at 3.5% was consistent with a scenario of in ationary inertia and slow convergence to 3%, even if facing a further weakening of domestic activity and milder pressures on the labor market. Thus, raising the MPR provided more degrees of freedom with respect to future movements in a context where new hikes, bounded and gradual, could be needed during 2016. Consequently, he voted for raising the monetary policy rate to 3.5% maintaining the message that gradual increases would be made in the future. 
One Board member stressed that monetary policy had been highly expansionary in recent years and, although in ation had been within or above the tolerance range for over eighteen months already, and was expected to remain there for several more months, the low level of activity and in ation expectations anchored to the target were important arguments for maintaining the expansionary stance of monetary policy. Indeed, by almost any parameter it was—and would continue to be—one of the most expansionary among emerging economies, if not the most. In his opinion, this had been a key element to contain the slowdown and ensure a positive growth rate for the economy and a dynamic labor market. 
However, for in ation to converge to the target it was necessary to gradually and moderately reduce the monetary stimulus. In that sense, raising the MPR was consistent with more persistent in ation, with the stronger pressures coming from core in ation and with the additional effects that the latest peso depreciation would have on in ation. Also with the resilience of the labor market. Finally, the in ationary risks, particularly in the immediate future, were not low, because of in ation’s persistence and the risk scenarios where shocks might affect the exchange rate. Meanwhile, the option of holding the rate unchanged was grounded on the gap remaining negative or even expanding moderately in the coming quarters, which reduced the likelihood of in ationary pressures on that front. 
It was also based on the signi cant depreciation of the real exchange rate, so any big and permanent further adjustment was less likely, though not impossible and, most importantly, on the projected gradual return to the target in the 
5 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
forecast horizon. The market estimated the same, which, incidentally, assumed a gradual withdrawal of the monetary stimulus in place. Therefore, he estimated that it was time to take a second step in the gradual reduction of the monetary stimulus. Thus, he voted for raising the MPR by 25 basis points to 3.5%, keeping the contractionary bias in the communication. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Claro, and Board members Vial, García and Marcel, to raise the monetary policy interest rate by 25 basis points, to 3.5%. 
