MINUTES OF THE 
MONETARY POLICY MEETING The monetary policy session N° 193 was held on 13 December 2012. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board member; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Also present, Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Kevin Cowan, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Claudio Raddatz, Economic Research Manager; Luis Álvarez, Consultant Manager of Communications; Enrique Orellana, Monetary Policy Strategy and Communication Manager; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
1.1 Brie ng 
The information submitted corresponds to the contents of December’s Monetary Policy Report. The presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publically available information may be accessed on the Bank’s web site1/. 
1.2 Background analysis and comments 
Speaking about the external scenario, the discussion centered on the implications of the expansionary policies that the monetary authorities of developed economies were implementing, because of the consequent increase in liquidity and the possibility that they could end up raising the expected international 
1/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
in ation rate. There was debate on the effects of the protracted application of these policies—everything suggested that this would be the case—would have on the emerging world. 
With respect to the Chilean economy, the special circumstances present were discussed: the persistently strong domestic demand within a context where in ation remained low. It was said that the counterpart of having low in ation for a long time, all other things being equal, was higher disposable income. This would occur in a context of rising consumer con dence indicators. 
2. Options 
On this occasion, with the information gathered since the last meeting, the Research Division presented as the relevant option to keep the monetary policy interest rate (MPR) at 5.0%, on similar grounds to those pointed out in previous meetings. 
News accumulated since the publication of the September Report did not alter signi cantly the international scenario described in it. Although a slower pace of growth was forecast for the world economy and Chile ́s trading partners over the next two years, by historic standards Chile ́s terms of trade were still high and global nancial conditions remained favorable. 
The international scenario, however, still posed signi cant risks in the short and medium term. At the moment, the United States authorities still had not reached an agreement to moderate the so-called “ scal cliff” and raise the ceiling of the scal debt, which could hinder growth and create uncertainty in global nancial markets in the coming weeks. In the Eurozone, policy makers had made advances in some of the reforms needed to enhance the monetary union, but the region’s scal and nancial situation remained fragile. Thus, a resurgence of tensions in the region with implications on international nancial market’s con dence could not be ruled out. In the cases of China and other emerging economies there were some positive signs that made less likely a sharp adjustment of their growth, like the one outlined in September, with consequences on the copper price and the external accounts. 
Domestically, incoming information showed that output was growing at a somewhat faster pace than 5% y-o-y, without the deceleration foreseen in the September Report. Natural resource related sectors had contributed to this result, as had the momentum of domestic demand. Within the latter, the contribution of gross xed capital formation stood out, boosted by mining investment and, 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
more recently, by investment in real estate, with effects on the activity, earnings and expenses of other sectors of the national economy. Marginally, these demand pressures had re ected essentially in higher imports, with bounded effects on the use of domestic resources and on the in ation of goods and services prices. 
Regarding price trends, beyond the surprises coming from perishable foods, the fact that core in ation had evolved somewhat below expectations in the last Report, with 1.8% y-o-y in November, despite the positive surprise from output was worth noting. Private expectations remained in line with target in ation in the policy horizon. The in ation of goods, mainly tradable, continued to make negative contributions to headline in ation while a compression of sales margins was observed. Services in ation kept a stable trajectory, as did nominal wages, which continued to grow by 6% to 7% y-o-y. The recent acceleration of mean labor productivity could have helped to moderate cost pressures, but this type of indicators may be very procyclical, so de nitive conclusions cannot be derived from them. 
The growth pattern driven by domestic demand had resulted in a wider current-account de cit, at both current prices and trend prices. As had been pointed out earlier, this larger current account de cit called for special attention because it could in uence the vulnerability of the Chilean economy to a sharp worsening of the external scenario. For the time being, the composition of the current account de cit, driven by greater investment in mining, as well as its funding, mainly foreign direct investment, were some factors that attenuated such vulnerability. Still, there was the risk that domestic demand could remain strong for some time, stretching the current account de cit and exacerbating domestic and external borrowing, which could result in vulnerabilities in the future. This issue required the participation and coordination of economic and nancial policies that went beyond the MPR. 
Accordingly, keeping the MPR unchanged was considered consistent with aligning trend output with its potential and with in ation converging to the target within the projection horizon. 
As on previous occasions, the option of lowering the monetary policy rate could be justi ed as a preventive measure to face the risk of a sharper deceleration of economic growth and in ation. This could happen if one of the external risks scenarios considered in the last Report were to materialize. However, the probabilities of such scenarios had not increased and it could even be argued that they had diminished as a result of the signs of recovery in China and progress made in Europe. Likewise, recent indicators showed that domestic demand and related variables were still dynamic and local nancial conditions remained 
benign, which neither anticipated an imminent slowdown of domestic demand in the coming months. Therefore, the option of reducing the monetary policy rate was not the best choice, the same as in the previous meeting. 
The option of raising the policy rate was also ruled out this time. Such option might be warranted to respond to the recent dynamic of domestic expenditure and its implications on the intensity of internal resource use. This dynamism of expenditure could create the proper conditions for higher in ationary pressures that could later call for stronger monetary policy action. However, recent data suggested that the acceleration of growth in sectors other than natural resources—more closely linked to the price dynamic—, in contrast with domestic expenditure, had been milder, while in ation indicators and private in ation expectations remained consistent with achieving the in ation target. 
As for the option of not changing the MPR, it was based on the fact that the MPR was within a range of neutral values, which provided time and exibility to wait and gather more information on the evolution of external conditions and its effects on the Chilean economy. This option was the market consensus, so it should be neutral for the evolution of the interest rate curve. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
About the international scenario, all the Board members agreed that the bigger risks continued to concentrate in the Eurozone. Several Board members noted that a more positive climate was being con gured, but there was still a long way ahead to arrive at any de nitive solution that would leave the crisis in the region behind. One Board member added that, in his view, many of the solutions being sought were of a rather structural nature (e.g., the banking union), and were more forward looking. For the same reason, they did not address the nancial and banking problems currently facing the Eurozone. Thus, he believed that in the Eurozone, problems piled up faster than measures could solve them, creating a dangerous tendency. 
Also with respect to the Eurozone, all the Board members coincided in their concerns about the growth prospects in the region, particularly because of the fragility shown by the economies in core Europe. One Board member added that recent gures suggested that there were cyclical elements in operation in these economies, and were compounded, albeit partially, with some elements of nancial nature, such as the downgrading of France’s sovereign debt. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
All the Board members underscored the risks inherent in the discussion on scal adjustments in the United States. Several of them noted that, in any case, some improvement in the political will to reach an agreement was observed at the time of the meeting. One Board member added that whatever the nal outcome of the debate—hopefully through an agreement—in one way or another it would mean a change in the American public debt trend, which was another issue to consider in the future economic scenario. Still, he continued, the possible failure to reach an agreement would have cyclical effects on the U.S. economy but, in his opinion, these effects would not be structural. Nevertheless, he added, it was obvious that these cyclical effects, in a debilitated situation, were counterproductive and thus an agreement was much needed. This Board member went on to indicate that, despite all, he was increasingly optimistic about the U.S. economy. Although employment had not recovered the way it had in earlier recessions, the counterpart was this economy’s higher productivity, an important requisite to exit a complex situation like the one they were now enduring. 
Several Board members drew attention to the U.S. Federal Reserve’s announcement that it would make monetary policy more expansionary. Some Board members added that this put further pressure on emerging countries, especially because of the challenge of avoiding the growing global liquidity from causing imbalances that jeopardized its nancial stability and medium- term growth outlook. One Board member added that this scenario could create confrontation that in turn could trigger a resurgence of trade protectionism, with complex consequences on the global economy. 
All the Board members agreed that, notwithstanding the risks, it was quite clear that in the short term the international situation favored Chile, at least for the moment: the prices of copper and other exported commodities were high and conditions to access external nancing were good. 
One Board member noted that the combination of external factors suggested that the Chilean economy would continue to post an expansion of output and demand, which entailed the risk of a widening of the current account de cit. In addition, there was the nominal and real appreciation of the exchange rate, which also had costs. In his view, continued this Board member, the data suggested that the combination of exchange rate appreciation and increased current account de cit seemed normal, because the trajectory of many of these variables had proceeded in a similar way in other countries, either because of the type of external funding they received or the evolution of domestic credit. However, he concluded, these developments had to be monitored very closely. Going forward, to the extent that risks remained bounded in Europe, it was 
possible that conditions would remain favorable to Chile, and exchange rate pressures and the current account de cit would remain. If so, and if these conditions continued in place for a long time, the main challenge would be, not only for the Central Bank but in general, to coordinate economic policies aiming at minimizing the risks of incubating some imbalance. This, at the same time, without limiting the gains provided by good economic policy conduct and open access to external markets. 
About the domestic scenario, all the Board members underscored the strength of domestic output and demand, together with the low in ation of November. Some Board members drew attention to the contrast between the strong economy and low in ation. One Board member noted that it was premature to try to distinguish the validity of the different hypotheses that could explain this contrast: whether there really was a delay in the manifestation of in ation, if there was a temporary compression of margins, an increase in productivity or some dif culty in the measuring of output gaps. Irrespective of the validity or importance of each of these hypotheses, he went on, it was clear that some in ationary pressures were still present in the Chilean economy, which was a factor to bear in mind when making a monetary policy decision. One Board member said that the possible reasons explaining the difference between the behavior of output and in ation compounded with low external in ation and the peso’s tendency to appreciate. Anyway, he said, it was important to evaluate the in ation trend over a long perspective, because part of the present developments re ected a reversal of past movements. Actually, he noted, the average of y-o-y in ation over the course of the last thirty months was practically 3%. Still, looking farther ahead, one could con rm the presence of signi cant in ationary risks, as the output gaps were closed and economic activity continued to perform with vigor. 
With respect to the monetary policy decision, all the Board members agreed that the body of information available validated keeping the MPR at 5.0% as the best choice. One Board member noted that, although the strength of domestic demand and the rising prices of real estate assets were cause for concern, the fact that in ation was rmly placed in the lower part of the tolerance range permitted to keep the MPR at 5%. He added that, should such tensions persist, corrective action would be needed, which would require close coordination with other authorities responsible for economic policy making. 
One Board member said that not changing the MPR was favored by a wide margin, with no obvious changes in sight. To lower the MPR meant failing to properly weigh the risks associated to the strong expansion of output and 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
demand. Raising it could exacerbate some of the problems facing Chile and would be inconsistent with monetary policy measures being taken in other countries, a reality that, for now, could not be overlooked. 
One Board member mentioned that, with the unbiased risk balance, it was dif cult to propose an option other than maintaining the MPR. To lower it, in a scenario of strong output and low unemployment, did not seem prudent. Neither was raising it a reasonable choice. The current level of the MPR was not particularly low, and a rather big differential persisted with respect to developed economies. In this context, the degrees of freedom of monetary policy would be certainly reduced and the right thing to do was to persevere along the lines of previous months. 
One Board member noted that, in a calmer international economy, without the present risks, the most prudent decision would probably be to raise the MPR since, in such a context, excess demand would be a predictor of higher in ation. However, the world was witnessing unprecedented, hyper-expansionary monetary policies, which had even intensi ed recently, and would imply that the developed economies would probably have low interest rates for an even longer period than expected. One could not rule out, he added, that those interest rates could rise if in ation premiums increased, but that real interest rates—the ones that truly mattered for these purposes— would remain very low for a long period, which also created stress in open economies like Chile. Considering that sole element, Chile would be wise to reduce the policy rate this time, in order to align its relative prices with world prices. But at the same time, the current account de cit was large and had been revised upward, which posed a policy puzzle that was hard to solve. In this context, any decision was an active decision, even if it meant not to make any change, because it entailed choosing one option. Taking all of this into account, and despite that the puzzle continued to intensify, the right option this time was to keep the MPR where it was. 
One Board member highlighted the crossroads monetary policy was persistently facing, with elements pointing in the direction of increased expansion, particularly from abroad, and others pointing the opposite way, mainly domestic. In any case, he added, the current level of Chile’s MPR was one of the highest among the countries with which Chile is typically compared, de nitely higher than that of developed economies and also higher than that of most emerging economies. In such circumstances, there seemed to be no major changes in the scene. There were still important external risks, and domestic activity continued to be unusually strong, with in ation unusually low. Accordingly, 
keeping the MPR unchanged was the right decision. Raising it was inconsistent with the delicate external situation and with the low in ation at the moment and expected over the short term, as well as with the medium-term target. To support this vision was the relatively high level of the interest rate differential shown by Chile. Lowering the MPR was not compatible either with stronger than expected output and demand. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided to maintain the monetary policy rate at 5.0%. Voting for this action, Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board members Marshall, Claro and Vial. 
