MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary Policy Meeting No. 243, held on 14 February 2017. 
Present: Mario Marcel, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member: Pablo García, Board member; Rosanna Costa, Board member. 
Present the Finance Undersecretary, Alejandro Micco. 
Also present: Juan Pablo Araya, acting General Manager and General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Rodrigo Cifuentes, interim Financial Policy Division Director; Francisco Ruiz, acting Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Tatiana Vargas, acting Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Carlos Medel, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background minutes and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
Since the January meeting, news had been con rming that anticipating the MPR cuts described in the Monetary Policy Report was an appropriate measure; in particular, activity was perceived to be somewhat slower and in ation was evolving in line with expectations. 
December’s Imacec, although in line with expectations, con rmed that the fourth quarter had been below forecast, particularly in sectors unrelated with natural resources. In ation had surprised as too high in January, largely undoing the negative surprise of the previous month. With this, the evolution of prices 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
remained in line with the provisions in the Report. The more detailed analysis of the CPI also tended to con rm the view that in ation had been driven mainly by the evolution of the exchange rate. The peso showed an appreciation of more than 9% from its early 2016 peak, after a rise of around 15% the previous year. 
Overall, the data for the month and the recent behavior of the exchange rate suggested that the short-term in ationary trend would be somewhat below expectations. Going forward, assuming a relatively stable exchange rate, in ation was still expected to converge, from near the oor of the tolerance range, to 3% during the policy horizon. As noted at the last meeting, this behavior meant that the economy would be able to regain growth levels more coherent with its potential by the end of this year, an assumption that, of course, should be monitored in the light of incoming data. Recently, the poor activity indicators had given rise to doubts. However, it should also be considered that this additional weakness was not perceived with equal force in the demand data and that the consensus view was that the external scenario could end up being better than expected, because of either higher growth of some trading partners or better nancial conditions and terms of trade than assumed in the Report’s baseline scenario. Finally, the results of the new compilation of National Accounts were about to come out, which would have great weight in the projections of the March Report. 
Aside from providing data and projections, the Research Division mentioned three elements it thought important in deciding the options to propose the Board at this meeting. 
To begin with, a cycle of further monetary stimulus was taking shape, the convenience of which had begun to be discussed several months earlier and which the Board deemed appropriate to communicate as the most likely scenario in the last Report, where it was used as a working assumption that the MPR would stand at 3% for several months, to gradually be raised as macroeconomic conditions normalized. Of course, there was nothing special about the 3% oor, in the sense that the appropriate stimulus would be calibrated over the next few months in line with incoming data. It was true, however, that, barring a signi cant surprise leading to important changes in the expected path for in ation, it was reasonable to wait for the effects of the monetary expansion to become visible before proposing any substantial change to the expected trajectory for the policy rate. 
Second, the MPR trajectory that could be inferred from the different measures of market expectations contemplated reductions down to 2.75%, which would occur around September of this year. Then a normalization of the monetary 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
policy instance would begin towards the second quarter of 2018. This meant that the market expected an average rate of around 2.9% for the next twelve months and 3.1% for the twelve months after. In other words, the monetary impulse expected by the market was no different from what was derived from the working assumption proposed in December and the observations on the convenience of anticipating it as discussed in subsequent meetings. This occurred also in a context where expected in ation two years ahead was around the target and the short-term expectations were not far from the Bank’s own projections. 
Finally, the monetary policy stance was clearly expansionary. For one thing, with in ation expectations one year out ranging between 2.5 and 3%, the average real MPR for the next twelve months was estimated to be around zero, implying that it would be in the order of 100 basis points (bp) below its neutral level. 
In this context, the Research Division considered as the relevant options to either lower the MPR by 25 bp, bringing it to 3%, or keep it at 3.25%; both options referred to the need to shortly complete the monetary expansion cycle proposed in the Report. The market had a very similar view, because although for this meeting there was a divide between those who expected the policy rate to be trimmed 25 bp and those who expected no change, a very large majority expected that such cut would take place no later than March. 
The same as in the last meeting, the difference between the two options’ effects on the projections was small and the disparities had to do mostly with communicational aspects. 
The rst option—a 25 bp cut—had the advantage of being totally consistent with a scenario where such action was very likely to take place shortly. And it would help further if news suggesting that weak activity would be more persistent were con rmed. Its downside had to do with the communication signaling the most likely direction for the coming months. At this point, given the brevity of the meetings’ press release, there could be some communicational issues. On one hand, keeping the downward bias could be misconstrued as that the Board was considering a boost to the monetary stimulus materially greater than previously foreseen, a situation that, although possible, was not the baseline scenario. On the other hand, to change to a neutral bias after the cut, could be interpreted as ruling out the possibility of moving to a MPR below 3% in the following months, and in the opinion of the Research Division, such a scenario had a reasonable probability of occurrence. 
Holding the MPR at 3.25% with a downward bias had the advantage that it needed no further precision about the level where the MPR would remain in the 
following months and reaf rmed, broadly, the evaluation in the Report. Such exibility was particularly useful considering that at the next meeting a large part of the analysis for the March Report would be ongoing, so there would be more information to outline the future trajectory of the MPR. 
2. Monetary Policy Decision3/ 
About the external scenario, several Board members agreed that in the last month conditions had taken a turn for the better, especially in emerging economies. One Board member commented that developed economies, were generally showing good indices in the industrial sector and that in ation was again rising, partly in uenced by fuel prices. He went on to point out that, even so, the view of the monetary authorities of those countries was moderate, reassuring the markets and announcing that they would maintain their monetary stimuli. The US was still recovering in line with expectations, with a dynamic labor market. China maintained its soft deceleration program, losing reserves quite rapidly and putting moderate upward pressure on interest rates to curb borrowing and currency losses at the margin. 
One Board member noted that the nancial conditions for emerging economies and the terms of trade for Chile were more favorable. However, he said, these conditions could change abruptly. In addition, there were more structural risk factors: threats to the stability of the European Monetary Union and China’s nancial system, the considerable increase in political uncertainty in the West, and doubts about support for essential institutions for the smooth operation of the international economic system. To the extent that these factors persisted, they were likely to end up eroding con dence and delaying the recovery of global investment. 
One Board member commented that there was still evidence of a signi cant recovery in the main developed economies, thus maintaining the expectation of a gradual normalization of monetary policy, especially in the US. Commodity prices had continued to rise, despite some speci c elements affecting the price of copper. He drew attention to the sharp appreciation of the currencies in recent weeks, as well as the decline in long-term rates—especially indexed ones in Chile—which re ected an overview of still favorable external conditions. 
3/ In order to preserve the regulatory individual anonymity in the discussion, all ve Board members are herein referred to as males, including the recently incorporated female member Ms Rosanna Costa. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member said that, since the previous Meeting, the relative calm in international markets, with some marginal improvement in emerging countries, had occurred thanks to analysts and investors that had toned down the likelihood of substantive imminent changes in US economic policy, beyond rhetoric. In the case of Chile, the in ow of foreign capital had been combined with a better outlook for the price of copper, resulting in a signi cant appreciation of the peso, both bilaterally and multilaterally. In his view, however, the permanence of this scenario was highly uncertain. In recent years there had been abrupt changes in investors’ perceptions due to factors of similar magnitude to those characterizing the current picture of risks menacing the world economy. New de nitions in the US, political instability in Europe, episodes of nancial instability in China or even the persistence of a high level of uncertainty could cause signi cant nancial turmoil affecting emerging countries. In other words, he concluded, such relative calm abroad could not necessarily be trusted. 
Locally, several Board members commented that while January’s in ation had been above expectations, it undid the surprises with opposite signs of the previous months. Thus, they pointed out, the Report’s scenario was again valid. One Board member pointed out that core in ation continued to decelerate, with a signi cant reduction in services CPI growth due to the normalization of its basis of comparison. This, coupled with the recent exchange rate appreciation and the gradual widening of the output gap, made it possible to foresee an in ation path similar to the forecast, below 3% annually for a good part of 2017, touching 2% in some months. 
One Board member noted that while the recent appreciation of the peso brought down the short-term in ation forecast, it was striking that expectations for the end of the year and 2018 remained near 3%. In his view, there was some dissonance between the strength of the peso and the persistent weakness of activity, suggesting that the appreciation in real terms could be reversed during the year—as it would not be consistent with persistently weak activity—or that the favorable nancial conditions and the appetite for emerging economies’ assets—which had favored the appreciation of the currency—could lend support to output and employment which, while not necessarily very signi cant, could prevent a persistent downward pressure on in ation. In his view, this was probably the most sensitive point in projecting the outlook for monetary policy. 
Other Board member pointed out that the evolution of the macroeconomic scenario—wider capacity gaps, an appreciated RER and still decelerating nominal wages—led to the belief that the disin ation process would continue and also introduce greater uncertainty about the convergence to the target over the policy horizon. He also drew attention to the combination of an MPR and an exchange 
rate—both in real terms—whose levels were very similar to those of several years ago when expected in ation and growth were much higher than now. He added that while longer-term market rates had fallen, this was not enough to justify a greater monetary stimulus, as they could re ect downward pressures on the real neutral MPR as a result of continued weakness in investment and not necessarily a more expansionary monetary policy. 
Several Board members drew attention to poor domestic activity. One Board member noted that gures were dif cult to read, as cyclical factors (e.g. the adjustment of the real estate sector and the sharper than expected fall in mining investment) coexisted with one-time shocks, like the public workers’ strike. Only once new information about the early months of 2017 and the close of the 2016 National Accounts became available could these effects be better gured out. If most of the shocks were more persistent, simply because of a basis effect, 2017 growth would be slower than foreseen in the last Report. If, on the contrary, the transient components were very strong and reversed in the rst months of the year, the Report’s baseline scenario would most likely remain fully in force. He went on to recall that demand had maintained a low but stable growth trajectory: the wage bill had risen marginally more than anticipated, private consumption—especially of durable goods—had been somewhat more dynamic, and investment in machinery and equipment, especially non-mining, had been on a smooth recovery path for several months. Credit also maintained bounded dynamism, particularly in the lines of consumption and housing. 
One Board member indicated that the dragging effect of the weak gures of the last quarter of 2016 would also mean a downward correction in growth for the early part of 2017. In turn, some labor market gures, asset prices, consumption and a more auspicious external outlook suggested that these negative effects should not mechanically affect the Bank’s activity estimates for this year. 
One Board member commented that the fourth quarter of 2016 had posted the lowest annual growth rate since the nancial crisis, which, with some circumstantial factors, was likely to be repeated in the rst quarter of 2017. Thus, he believed that growth in 2017 would be in the lower part of the range estimated in the Report. One fundamental factor in this respect was the behavior of investment, which continued to show varying degrees of weakness in each of its lines, i.e. mining investment, non-mining investment in machinery and equipment, investment in buildings and public works, as well as in business services and engineering. On the other hand, the risks identi ed in the December Report—more adverse external conditions, weaker investment— were compounded with the possibility of weaker salaried employment and consumption resulting from the contraction of building activity. 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Turning to the monetary policy decision, one Board member noted that the pessimism of domestic economic agents dominated despite that current economic conditions favored an improvement in con dence. In his view, this was consistent with a somewhat wider activity gap and a resilient labor market, factors that should be monitored. In any case, he went on, there was reasonable doubt about the baseline scenario, which gave room to pause before continuing with the process of lowering the policy rate that had begun in January and, therefore, he voted for keeping the MPR unchanged, pending further background information. 
One Board member recalled that the December Report considered a 50 bp cut in the MPR in the rst part of the year and that incoming news had suf ced to anticipate that process. Therefore, the decision now was about the need, or not, to act beyond what was contemplated in the Report. He added that maintaining the MPR at this meeting had the disadvantage that if the need to reduce the MPR by 25 bp was so obvious, it was dif cult to explain its postponement. On the other hand, lowering the MPR keeping the expansionary bias could be equivocal as to how much more it was thought the MPR should be lowered. In any case, it should be recalled that the market estimated an MPR around 2.75% by the middle of the year and, with all the existing doubts, the Research Division had suggested that there was reasonable probability that the upcoming Report’s scenario would indicate an MPR trajectory compatible with it. Furthermore, he continued, to wait for another month would not solve the conundrum completely, since for the next meeting the Report would not be closed and, therefore, there would be no certainty as to whether a reduction of the MPR should come with or without a bias, or how to communicate it. Doing so could lead to the uncomfortable position of prejudging at the March meeting the central message of the Report that would be published only two weeks later. He concluded by pointing out that, in any case, the monetary policy decision had to do, rst and foremost, with the level of the rate. The bias discussion should not take priority, to later choose a certain level for the MPR. 
One Board member noted that in the current circumstances, and considering that in the December Report it had been pointed out that in a scenario of slower growth—as the actual one—two MPR cuts in the rst half of the year could be justi ed, the right thing to do was to keep the MPR at 3.25% and the bias of the press release, while waiting for further information before altering this decision. 
One Board member pointed out that the outlook for activity remained uncertain, but priority should be given to in ationary pressures coming from services and wages that would remain bounded for a long time, con rming that there was room for a somewhat more expansionary monetary policy. Thus, background 
information reaf rmed the Report’s contents regarding a 50 bp cut off the MPR in the rst part of this year. In his view, the option of keeping both the rate and the bias had some advantages. It was compatible with the known information and with the message the Board had already delivered about the MPR. Also, the market would assimilate it well and it would not constitute a deviation from expectations. In addition, this option provided important degrees of freedom to evaluate the future trajectory of monetary policy. If macroeconomic dynamics and in ationary prospects remained, it was possible that a further adjustment of the MPR should be made in the short term. But it did not necessarily justify anticipating the decision. Otherwise, the value of the new antecedents—those that would allow pacing the desired monetary stimulus—would be lost. The option to lower the rate had the main dif culty of communicating the future trajectory for the MPR. Keeping an open bias, announcing future reductions, would deliver the signal of going beyond 3%, so he believed that further information was needed before establishing that. On the other hand, deleting the bias would pose excessive restrictions on monetary policy options, which he considered to be premature with the data available, and could give a sign of being certain about the trajectory for the next few quarters, which the Bank was in no position to do. 
One Board member was of the view that this was a decision in which the merits of timely action and completion of the MPR adjustment assumed in the December Report should be weighed against the signal that would be provided about the future evolution of monetary policy. The information accumulated since the Board had lowered the MPR in January fully justi ed a new cut this time. If no factors were envisioned that could signi cantly alter this scenario, at least upward, the decision to apply or postpone the 25 bp cut could be justi ed only on tactical grounds, linked to the ability to deliver a clear signal on the likely behavior of monetary policy. He added that he felt that neither option would take the market by surprise, since expectations were almost equally divided between the two. It could not be ignored that there was debate about the magnitude of the monetary stimulus required by the Chilean economy. The most comprehensive response would be provided in the March Report. Under such circumstances, the potential clarity of immediately completing the MPR adjustment could be overshadowed by misleading interpretations of the ensuing actions at a time when the next Report was still 45 days away. The risk of this had to be compared with the risks associated with a delay in the MPR adjustment. In his view, these risks were threefold. First, there was the macroeconomic risk of further delaying a justi ed decision, knowing that monetary policy acted with signi cant lags. Then there was the risk of giving misleading signals to the market about the Board’s interpretation of macroeconomic conditions and outlook. The third risk—in his opinion, the most important one—was that 
5 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
it would fuel doubts about the effectiveness of monetary policy. It should be emphasized that, to the extent that nancial conditions ensured the transmission of a change in the policy rate to the market rates, the latter in uenced activity through a multiplicity of mechanisms, particularly with respect to the relative prices of assets and the currencies, with effects on the decisions to consume, save, invest and produce. In his view, the widening of activity gaps that was expected for the coming months increased rather than reduced the diversity of these channels. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Claro and Board members Vial, García and Costa, to keep the monetary policy rate at 3.25%. 
