MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING 
Monetary policy meeting No. 207 held on 18 February 2014. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Enrique Marshall, Vice Governor; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member. 
Also present: Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Claudio Soto, acting Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Kevin Cowan, Financial Policy Division Director; Francisco Ruiz, acting Statistics Division Director; Miguel Ricaurte, acting International Analysis Manager; Claudio Raddatz, Economic Research Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Advisory Department Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communications of Monetary Policy Manager; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Erika Arraño, Executive Secretary to the Governor’s Cabinet; Natalia Gallardo, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
2. Options 
Based on the data known after the last meeting, the Research Division presented as relevant options keeping the monetary policy rate (MPR) at 4.50% or lowering it by 25 basis points, to 4.25%. 
New international information since the last meeting was consistent with the baseline scenario outlined in December’s Monetary Policy Report, a gradual recovery of our trading partners’ growth, a slow withdrawal of the monetary stimulus in developed economies and tighter nancial conditions in emerging markets. However, some of the risks identi ed seemed to have worsened, as 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
did the chances of a sharper slowdown in China, while others—such as those associated with the Eurozone—had moderated. Another major risk came from the process of monetary policy normalization in the United States and its consequences on global nancial markets. For the moment, no changes could be observed in the expected path of the Fed funds rate, but one point worth noting was the recent decline in U.S. unemployment and its possible implications for the output gap in the U.S. economy. 
Domestically, the data revealed a sharper deceleration of output and demand than had been foreseen in the Monetary Policy Report. Such deceleration was headed by investment, while private consumption had been resilient within the context of a still tight labor market. In ation was bounded despite the substantial depreciation of the exchange rate, and expectations continued to hover around the target. 
The option of keeping the policy rate unchanged leaned on the facts that cuts had already been made to it, domestic credit continued to ow normally to households and businesses, the peso had depreciated in real terms to slightly above historical averages, and in ation was near the target. Thus, pausing now could buy time to gather more information about the evolution of output and demand in the rst quarter of the year and determine whether the slowdown in the fourth quarter of 2013 had been in uenced by some one-time occurrences or it rather re ected a slower than expected growth trajectory. 
A cut to the MPR was consistent with estimates in the last Monetary Policy Report. For several quarters output and particularly that of sectors unrelated to natural resources, had been growing below trend, taking pressure off installed capacity and would, at some point, also re ect in an easing of labor market conditions. Incoming data showed that the economic slowdown had intensi ed. Plus some indicators of actual and forecast investment had fallen short of expectations, triggering a downward revision of short-term projections for output and demand. 
In connection with the recent behavior of in ation and its implications for monetary policy, aside from some speci c elements related to fuel prices, the recent increase re ected the impact of the peso depreciation on the prices of import goods, which was part of the adjustment process. It was important to watch that the second-round effects of these shocks on other prices, wages and expectations remain bounded. At this point no signi cant side effects could be detected and they could be expected to remain bounded inasmuch as nal and factor market gaps persisted. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
3. Monetary policy decision 
About the global economy, several Board members agreed that, broadly speaking, recent developments were in line with the baseline scenario presented in the Report. All ve Board members agreed that the scenario for emerging economies had become more complex, particularly as the risks related to the fragility of some of them had increased. They cited the case of China, in particular the health of its nancial system and the possibility of a sudden stop of credit and growth. One Board member expressed his concern about the evolution of the copper price. Although it had been uctuating within a de ned band in recent months, there had been some surprises that were dif cult to interpret. For example, while inventories were falling in the London Stock Exchange, they had risen steeply in Shanghai, coinciding with increases in Chinese imports of copper, which did not seem consistent with the China’s output gures. He also drew attention to the increasing political tensions in Ukraine and Venezuela. 
Still on the external front, one Board member underscored the volatility of nancial markets and the appreciation of the currencies. In his view, this seemed to respond to uctuations in the appetite for risky assets, which might be related to the vulnerability of economies and their ability to adjust the exchange rate as a stabilizing tool. He added that in many emerging countries the highly volatile exchange rate coincided with increases in interest rates at different maturities. In Chile, the depreciation of the peso had been accompanied by stable—and, in some cases, declining—of both long-term interest rates and rates in the money markets for different maturities. One Board member called attention to recent developments in economies such as Brazil and Peru. He noted that despite intervening in the currency market, Brazil had been unable to prevent the depreciation of its currency. And about Peru, he stressed the fact that long- term interest rates were still on the rise, despite the cuts to the policy rate. All this, in his opinion, suggested that the external scenario was setting new limits on monetary policy, which should be monitored carefully before drawing any lessons that would be useful to the Chilean case. 
About the domestic economy, all the Board members stressed that incoming gures pointed to a deeper than expected slowdown. Surprises came mainly from investment and consumption still growing in line with expectations. One Board member noted that the surprise in the output gures and its implications on projections were no small thing, and therefore this was a topic of high relevance in the macro scenario. One Board member noted that the combined changes were important, but he believed that as yet there was no reason to fear too big a deviation. The nancial market remained well behaved, and credit aggregates had continued the trend of recent quarters. In his view, this was an 
important element because it gave support to the notion that there were factors suggesting that the slowdown was gradual and not very different from what had been anticipated a few quarters ago. In any case, he added, there were some nancial prices, including stock indexes and long-term interest rates that might be anticipating a slightly faster deceleration. Overall, he concluded, these developments called for close follow-up. 
Several Board members noted that, until now, the in ationary effects of the exchange rate depreciation appeared to be bounded. They noted that as long as the economy continued to grow at a relatively slow pace, in ation expectations remained in line with the target and wages grew moderately, the pass-through from the exchange rate to prices should not increase signi cantly. Anyway, they agreed, the second-round effects of the depreciation was something that should be examined on a permanent basis to stay free of negative surprises. 
Regarding the monetary policy decision, a Board member said that, although the December Report’s scenario contained an implicit monetary easing, the macro context had evolved since then, showing a more complex scenario for the group of emerging economies and more evidence of the magnitude of the slowdown in investment, particularly that associated with the maturation of the important mining cycle. Furthermore, the decision of the previous meeting had included an explicit bias and, despite currency uctuations, the money market had internalized this, indicating quite clearly that two to three rate cuts would be applied to the MPR in the coming quarters. 
The same Board member added that, considering the above, the option of keeping the policy rate should not be an option this time around. In his opinion, to do so could be construed as concern about the exchange rate movements, or discomfort on the part of the Board with respect to expectations of monetary easing in the coming months. Both aspects were in opposition to the in ation targeting scheme, where a weaker macroeconomic scenario should be associated to a real depreciation of the peso and lower interest rates, precisely what had been happening in actuality. Although the most plausible option was to reduce the MPR by 25 basis points, he did not rule out the possibility of a more aggressive reduction coupled with a less explicit bias. 
A Board member said he believed that the options presented by the Research Division were the right ones. Although some of the elements mentioned before could suggest that waiting was the convenient thing to do before lowering the MPR, his decision was to reduce it by 25 basis points in response to developments in domestic activity and also to respect consistency with the communication released after the previous meeting. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member noted that every indicator reaf rmed the need for some additional monetary policy adjustment. In his view, the economy could accommodate a somewhat more expansionary monetary policy, especially if aside from the changes in the macroeconomic scenario one considered the current strength of in ation expectations in the context of deep exchange rate adjustment. 
One Board member said that the option that emerged quite clearly was to lower the MPR by 25 basis points. In his opinion, the adjustment process had not been completed and there was room to cut the policy rate. This was consistent with the belief that the MPR was at a relatively high level when this adjustment process had begun and with the path that output had followed since then. By the same token, he could think of no powerful reason for not lowering the MPR at this meeting. 
One Board member noted that the options presented were the most reasonable, but the option of lowering clearly dominated. This latter option was more consistent with the still dynamic labor market, with credit growing vigorously and potential second-round effects of the exchange rate depreciation on in ation. However, given the current macroeconomic scenario and, in particular, the economy growing below potential, he believed it less likely that these effects could be signi cant, although one should always be alert to new information in this area. Therefore, he continued, the option of lowering the MPR was better and consistent with a faster than estimated slowdown, a reduced short-term outlook for output and in ation under control. Moreover, he concluded, it was also consistent with the prior communication of the Board. 
About future movements of the MPR, all the Board members agreed on the desirability of maintaining the bias of the last meeting. One Board member noted that although the next movement of the policy rate would most likely be down, he did not think this should be done immediately. In his view, monetary policy had already entered in a clearly expansionary territory, which re ected in the long-term interest rates. In addition, the interest rate differentials with respect to other relevant countries had narrowed signi cantly. Meanwhile, while the current account de cit had fallen, it was still high given that international nancial markets were becoming intolerant with emerging economies. All this suggested that after lowering the MPR at this meeting, one should await new information that would allow to better assess the need for further monetary stimulus. 
One Board member noted that with the information at hand some further adjustment could be required, which justi ed keeping the monetary policy 
bias. Another Board member said he thought important to maintain the communication of the previous meeting. In his view, an additional monetary measure beyond this meeting seemed likely. Its magnitude and timing would depend on new information becoming available. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice Governor Marshall, and Board members Claro, Vial and García, to lower the annual monetary policy rate by 25 basis points to 4.25%. 
