MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 219, held on 12 February 2015. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Enrique Marshall, Vice-Governor; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member. 
Present, the acting Finance Minister, Alejandro Micco. 
Also present: Juan Pablo Araya, acting General Manager, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Francisco Ruiz, acting Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Elías Albagli, Economic Analysis and Modeling Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; María Francisca Pérez, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
Over the month, the low levels of growth and in ation around the world had jumpstarted the quantitative easing program in the Eurozone. Subsequently, other economies had decided to extend their monetary stimulus, shaping a scenario where global liquidity would continue to rise. The main exception had been the United States, where activity and in ation indicators suggested that the authorities would begin to gradually raise the monetary policy interest 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
rate (MPR) this year. The dollar had appreciated during the month, the rates on Treasury notes had increased, as had volatility, while term premiums were still low and agents continued to wager for a slower withdrawal of the monetary stimulus than had been suggested by the Fed. 
In this context, most currencies had depreciated against the dollar but, notwithstanding intensi ed geopolitical events during the month, no big changes could be observed in risk premiums, nor a reversal of credit in ows to emerging economies. According to the assessment by the Research Division, the normalization of the US monetary policy would pose important challenges to emerging economies, especially those whose funding was more linked to the dollar market and whose business cycle differs from that of the US or where in ation is higher. 
About economic activity, incoming news continued to show the opposing effects of the oil price reduction on one hand, and weaker investment on the other. Nonetheless, the evolution of the international economy was consistent with a recovery of world output, in line with the forecasts in the December Monetary Policy Report. The news also con rmed the poor performances of Latin America and China, whose authorities seemed to have prioritized containing vulnerabilities over boosting growth. Doubts about China’s growth could explain, in part, that the price of copper had failed to recover, despite that most analysts thought it should, based on the behavior of its fundamentals. The oil price, meanwhile, was increasing, but everything pointed at it remaining near its current levels for a protracted period of time. 
In this context, the external economy was expected to continue providing a moderate impulse to the domestic economy, despite the sharp fall in the copper price. However, the risk of any events triggering a greater depreciation of the peso was still present—and maybe even more likely than some months earlier—, given the greater divergence between the monetary policies of the main developed countries, the greater geopolitical risks, the lower commodity prices, the doubts surrounding the Chinese economy and the low levels of nancial premiums. 
On the domestic front, in ation had been a surprise in January, at a monthly 0.1%, a little above the internal estimate and quite higher than the market’s expectation. The most remarkable development continued to be the behavior of core in ation, as had been stressed in many previous meetings. In January, CPIEFE in ation was 0.7% month-on-month, and accumulated a substantial difference with the Report’s estimate only a few months back, which had been offset by the lower fuel in ation in the headline in ation measure. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
The analysis suggested that the stronger core in ation had to do mainly with the exchange rate. It was thought that its greater weight was related to the greater persistence of currency shocks in a scenario where, in addition, output gaps could be somewhat narrower, as could be inferred from the evolution of the labor market. Thus, the in ationary surprises had centered mainly on those goods that were more dependent on the exchange rate, while the other items had behaved as projected. In particular, the services component of CPIEFE in ation had evolved in line with expectations and was expected to remain high, given its usual persistence and the stronger dynamism of the labor market. 
The evolution of CPIEFE in ation would delay the convergence of headline in ation to the target, with annual gures staying above the tolerance range for longer than previously thought. However, the current conditions were consistent with in ation converging to 3% towards the end of 2015. For one thing, the effects of the higher exchange rate on in ation would tend to dissipate as this variable would stabilize. For another, despite the positive gure of December’s IMACEC, the scenario continued to foresee weak output and demand during the rst half of 2015 and a gradual recovery over the second half. Meanwhile, despite successive nominal depreciations, the real exchange rate (RER) had seen quite smaller changes. Finally, the alternative measures of trend in ation—which focus on the less volatile components or that eliminate the items with the most abrupt changes—generally showed reductions in their in ation gures. 
In this sense, the scenario depicted in the December Report was still valid in essence, although clearly the upward risks for in ation had increased. As mentioned, external conditions favored drastic changes, possibly temporary, of the peso-dollar parity. A slower convergence of in ation could ultimately affect expectations, especially considering that, despite their recent hike, internal short-term-in ation forecasts were still above those of the market. 
In this context of higher in ation and with output not diverging far from the Report’s scenario, the option to make further cuts to the MPR seemed irrelevant. At the same time, the observed in ation deviation was not thought to jeopardize its convergence to the target, while the medium-term risks in the output scenario continued to be largely downward biased, so the option to raise the MPR didn’t seem relevant either. Accordingly, and in line with the previous meeting and the December Report, the Research division proposed as the only relevant option to keep the MPR at 3%. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
Speaking of the international scenario, all the Board members agreed that the news of the month were in line with the conditions outlined in the December Report. 
Several Board members commented that the recovery of the US economy was settling down. One Board member noted that said economy had made important gains in job creation, which suggested that the moment when the Fed would begin raising the policy rate was closer. He also said that China was still giving mixed signals, and doubts about its nancial system persisted, while the rest of the emerging world continued to give not-so-favorable signals as in earlier months, especially in Latin America. Europe and Japan were still weak, but in his opinion there could be some positive surprises in the coming months, associated to the depreciation of their currencies against the dollar and improved terms of trade owing to the drop in the oil price. He concluded by saying that he found it striking that tensions with Greece had not re ected in higher risk premiums in the rest of Europe, and his impression was that this re ected that a failure in negotiations would have lesser effects than had been perceived in 2013. 
One Board member noted that nancial asset prices were still highly volatile and he thought this would continue into the near future. This, in a context where the ongoing strengthening of the dollar and commodity prices had tended to stabilize, with some exceptions like oil, which had recovered. 
One Board member stated that Europe continued to be weak and with very low in ation, so new monetary measures had become necessary. This augmented the divergence with the United States. Plus, the region’s current geopolitical risks had not yet cleared, although their effects had been bounded so far. Meanwhile, the emerging economies, with variations, continued to re ect quite poor performances. Anyway, the concern was still centered on those economies with deteriorating fundamentals. He also said that the nancial markets had brought no major surprises. The dollar had regained strength, while commodities had uctuated, and the signi cant recovery in oil prices was worth noting. 
One Board member stressed that, in any case, the risks of the external scenario were clearly latent. He went on to say that this could imply lower in ation prospects than estimated in the December Report, or even de ation in major economic areas, together with diverging monetary policies in developed countries. In his view, the implications of such scenarios for Chile’s macroeconomic equilibrium and, in particular its medium-term in ationary outlook had to be monitored closely. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
About domestic activity, several Board members commented that it had outperformed projections, but there were signs that such behavior might not last. One Board member mentioned that there were factors such as the basis for comparison—the farming sector and the port strikes—, and the recent enforcement of higher taxes on automobiles, made him think that at least part of the recovery would be transitory. He was positively surprised by the consolidation of gains in salaried job creation and a signi cant improvement of output indicators associated with construction. 
Some Board members commented that, as had been said time and again at several meetings, actual gures, combined with some demand series, pointed to some stabilization of the velocity of growth, to 2%-3% during the rst half. One Board member opined that, while the gures were not good, they were consistent with forecasts in the December Report. Then he noted that employment and wage gures continued to surprise, re ecting that the labor market was sustaining acceptable dynamism. All this suggested that there was room for output and demand to grow during 2015 in line with the December Report’s projections. 
One Board member noted that after having had persistently decreasing growth projections for 2015 all throughout 2014, these projections had stabilized—with some marginal increases—in gures more consistent with the Report’s estimates. 
All ve Board members drew attention to the in ation surprise. One of them noted that this had also been accompanied by a further acceleration of wages. However, in his view, the main concern was in ation, which had not only challenged expectations in January, but was now on a somewhat higher trend than expected for the coming months, which would delay the return to the 3% target. 
Several Board members linked the evolutions of in ation and the exchange rate. One Board member said that part of the in ationary surprise could be traced to apparent additional effects of the exchange rate depreciation, which had been persistent. As had been often noted earlier, Chile’s ongoing macroeconomic adjustment, characterized by a signi cant slowdown, had been coupled with a real depreciation of the peso. In this context, monetary policy had become more expansionary in order to properly accommodate this adjustment process. The peso depreciation having a greater than expected in ationary effect could be associated, in his opinion, to the fact that it had been sharper in bilateral terms with the US dollar than from a multilateral standpoint. Thus, the disin ationary effects on the world economy had not yet manifested in domestic prices, aside from the drop in fuels. The peculiar evolution of currency parities around the world, with the US dollar gaining strength with respect of most other currencies, seemed to be at the core of this phenomenon. 
One Board member blamed the in ation surprise primarily on greater than expected effects of the peso depreciation. In his opinion, it was dif cult to work out the true reason for it, but it could be that a more depreciated real exchange rate for a long time, or smaller gaps in the labor market, were favoring the increased pass-through of the peso trajectory to in ation. 
One Board member indicated that the behavior of in ation was linked with the exchange rate more than anything else. The peso had depreciated more and more persistently than had been originally expected. Furthermore, beyond this variable’s usual volatility, the market estimated that the exchange rate would remain stable for a prolonged period, unlike other episodes in which the depreciation had been rather transitory. In his view, it had to do also with a higher pass-through coef cient than on earlier occasions, maybe because of a smaller than estimated gap, which was more consistent with the evolution of labor market indicators, such as employment and wages. 
In the opinion of one Board member it was obvious that the labor market had been resilient beyond expectations. However, he didn’t think that for the time being this could imply quantitatively signi cant constraints that could be creating underlying in ationary pressures, but this issue also called for continuous monitoring. 
Some Board members noted that in ation had brought private agents a bigger surprise than could be derived by internal projections. In that sense, one Board member thought it important to stress that the monetary policy diagnosis included in the December Report was transparent when it did not validate what at the moment were very low in ation expectations by the private sector for this year. 
One Board member was of the opinion that as the effect of the fuel price drop had been too low to counteract the upward pressures coming from other items, it was clear that the future in ation trend was not free of risks. Although the diagnosis of annual in ation converging to the target had not changed, the short-term trajectory had risks that could not be overlooked and the most likely development was that such convergence would take longer than forecast. Thus, he concluded, the in ation trajectory needed close follow-up over the coming months, including close monitoring of its short-term fundamentals and, particularly, the wage dynamics. 
Turning to the monetary policy decision, all ve Board members shared the view that the only plausible option was to keep the MPR at 3%. One Board member estimated that, in any case, there was a signi cant risk that in ation 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
would remain above the target for longer, which might call for some corrective action by the monetary authority. 
One Board member, after mentioning that the decision not to change the MPR clearly dominated any other alternative, stressed that, in his opinion, it was evident that lowering the rate was not an option in the near future. 
One Board member commented that the present scenario included a path for output that was in line with previous estimates, with in ation a little higher in the short term, but which still converged to the target during the policy horizon. In those circumstances, it was advisable, in his view, to reaf rm the policy orientation. He went on to note that the MPR was in a level that, broadly speaking, was consistent with the external conditions and the state of the domestic economy. He felt that the information at hand was not suf cient to suggest or anticipate the next move. In addition, the preparation of the Monetary Policy Report would provide a good opportunity to review the diagnosis and deliver more accurate signals about the next steps. He concluded by saying that the private sector had been assuming the diagnosis of the Central Bank and, accordingly, had removed from the policy horizon the cuts it foresaw in the months to come. Changing the policy signals abruptly could make much noise for the expectations formation process. 
One Board member argued that everything pointed to in ation gradually converging to the 3% target, because of the wider gap and low international in ation among other elements, but the issues analyzed at the meeting naturally recommended a more cautious monetary policy. Monetary policy had played a major part in the economy’s recovery, by injecting a substantial stimulus at the right moment. Furthermore, long-term interest rates were still very low, with indexed rates again at record lows. In his view, at least for some time, there was no visible room for increased monetary stimulus. In such a scenario, lowering the policy rate was not on the options menu given actual and expected in ation. Raising it was inconsistent with the business cycle and the projection that in ation would converge, albeit gradually, to the target. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marshall, and Board members Claro, Vial and García, to keep the monetary policy interest at 3%. 
