MINUTES OF THE 
MONETARY POLICY MEETING 
Monetary policy meeting held No. 254, held on 31 January and 1 February, 2018. 
Present: Mario Marcel, Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member; Rosanna Costa, Board member. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Solange Berstein, Financial Operations Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Financial Markets Manager; Juan Carlos Piantini, International Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Francisco Ruiz, Macroeconomic Statistics Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; María José González, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Carlos Medel, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Analysis of the technical teams International scenario 
The international scenario had improved since the last Meeting. Overall, activity in the developed economies continued to perform well and in some cases with better prospects for 2018. In the Eurozone, gures had become known that pointed to a dynamic and synchronized growth cycle, amidst improving levels of con dence and other fundamentals. However, political risks would continue to be a source of uncertainty. The approved launching of the second phase of negotiations between the United Kingdom and the European Union stood out. In the US, although in the fourth quarter of 2017 GDP showed some deceleration from previous quarters, the stronger private consumption and xed asset investment drew attention, in a scenario where the fundamentals of domestic spending remained favorable and the scal reform and the extension 
of the Government’s budget until February had been approved. However, doubts remained surrounding budget negotiations and debt limits. Furthermore, risks stemming from protectionist measures were still present. 
In ation remained contained in the developed economies. Regarding monetary policy, at its December meeting the US Federal Reserve (Fed) had raised the federal funds rate (ffr) by 25 basis points (bp). The improved outlook for activity and in ation had increased the likelihood—implicit in the prices of market assets—of the Fed raising the ffr range three times over the course of 2018. In the Eurozone, in ation had declined in December, mainly due to the food and energy components, while services remained low. The Bank of Japan had rati ed its commitment to an expansionary monetary policy, while in Sweden the Riksbank had announced the end of the asset purchase program after having met its in ation target and achieved positive activity gures, while the Bank of Canada had raised their policy rate. 
In the emerging world, worth noting was the dynamism that China’s GDP had sustained in the fourth quarter of 2017, owing largely to services. This occurred in the midst of increases in market interest rates and less liquidity injected by the Chinese monetary authority. In Latin America, short-term growth indicators continued to show mixed performance. Worth noting was the rebound in activity in Brazil and the upward revision of the growth outlook of some counterparts, as well as the incipient improvement of indicators in Argentina, in a context where the monetary authority had raised its in ation target. In any case, the pending scal challenges in some economies and political uncertainty continued to be the main risk factors for the region and, of late, had prompted a new reduction in the credit rating for Brazil. 
External nancial conditions remained favorable. Volatility, according to the main indexes, continued low, while stock markets and risk premiums had improved, and capitals continued to show robust net in ows to the emerging world. The long-term interest rates had shown dissimilar movements globally, with increases prevailing in the developed economies and decreases in the emerging economies, particularly in Latin America. In this context, the US dollar had weakened against most currencies since the last Meeting, partly because the economic outlook had improved more in other economies than in the US. On top of this were the statements of a representative of the US Government advocating a weaker currency. 
Commodity prices, in general, had risen since the last Meeting, particularly for fuels and copper, due mainly to news pointing to tighter markets and the 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
depreciation of the US dollar. At the same time, speculative positions remained high. The oil price had risen to US$65 to 70 per barrel (nearly 10% higher than at the last Meeting). Copper, meanwhile, traded around US$3.2 per pound (about 6% more than at the last Meeting). 
Domestic scenario 
At home, some of the movements observed in the nancial system up to the previous Meeting had been reversed. As of the second half of December, improvements in the stock market (IPSA) and spreads (sovereign and corporate) had been veri ed, while the Chilean peso had again appreciated to approach CLP 600 per dollar. Its strengthening had been somewhat more marked than that of other Latin American currencies, emerging and commodity exporters, so different multilateral measures of the peso also accumulated losses, although more limited than with respect to the US dollar. With this, the real exchange rate (RER)—in its 1986=100 measure—was estimated that it had been near 92 in December and 88 in January. Interest rates in the xed income market had posted widespread drops, after the increases observed until the previous Meeting. The lower rate on 2-year UF-indexed papers (around 50bp) was mainly explained by changes in the banks’ portfolios. 
As for domestic credit, in December lending interest rates had changed little and remained near historic lows. While mortgage rates had risen somewhat in recent months, consumer and commercial rates were quite beneath those at the beginning of the year. Credit growth, meanwhile, was still limited in these latter segments with some stronger momentum in housing loans. The Banking Lending Survey for the fourth quarter of 2017 had brought no news regarding changes in credit standards with respect to the previous quarter. 
Expectations for the monetary policy rate (MPR) as contained in the surveys had not changed with respect to the previous Meeting. Respondents did not foresee any adjustments over the next six months and placed it around 2.75% in one year out. Two years ahead they saw it at 3.0% in the Financial Brokers Survey (FBS) and 3.25% in the Economic Expectations Survey (EES). The prices of nancial assets anticipated a at MPR for somewhat longer and its expected level at the end of the policy horizon was 3.25%. 
About activity, in November the Imacec had increased 3.2% annually, above market expectations, and preliminary data for December pointed in the same direction. Thus, the actual gure for November was almost 1 percentage point (pp) more than foreseen in the December EES and market expectations (Bloomberg survey) after the publication of INE statistics by sector. The non- 
mining component had performed better than in the rest of the year, in uenced by trade, services and manufacturing, while the mining part had reduced the year-on-year expansion rate. In this context, according to the January EES, private expectations for GDP growth in 2018 and 2019 had risen to 3.2 and 3.5%, respectively (3% and 3.3% in December). 
On the side of domestic demand, there were upward surprises in some investment-related industries. In particular, it was worth noting a not-so negative behavior of several indicators linked to investment in construction and other works. Investment in machinery and equipment had remained strong, particularly imports of capital goods, excluding unusual transport vehicles. The December Survey of the Capital Goods Corporation had adjusted upward investment in construction and other works for 2018 and 2019. With this, 2018 investment would outperform 2017 to some extent. Business expectations (non- mining IMCE) of January had crossed to optimistic territory after quite some time in the pessimistic zone, with improvements in every sector. 
Consumption indicators maintained the dynamics of previous months, with stronger sales of durable goods, particularly automobiles. Annual growth in non-durable consumption was sluggish, but better than in earlier months. Indicators such as imports of consumer goods and new car sales (ANAC) for December had remained high. As for the determinants of consumption, consumer expectations had returned to the optimistic zone after several years, an advance that in any case had been led by improved expectations about the future. The labor market remained characterized by limited annual expansion of salaried employment and more dynamic growth in self-employment. In any case, the former had been accelerating in annual terms driven by the public sector, while the private sector remained basically stagnant. The unemployment rate had decreased, but was somewhat above the year-ago level. Salaries were growing at a similar pace as the previous month, around 4.5% and 2.5% in nominal and real terms, respectively (series spliced with base year 2016 = 100). 
Interviews for the Business Perceptions Report showed good expectations for business and the local economy in 2018, even though more interviewees said that their current level of activity showed no signs of signi cant changes yet. Some retail sectors mentioned meager sales so far this summer. The good results of several exporting companies stood out, while investment-related activities showed increased spending in machinery and equipment. The construction sector was still perceived as slow. Several respondents expressed their intention to hire additional staff in the coming months. No signi cant changes were seen in price and cost pressures. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
In ation had been 0.1% in December, in line with market expectations overall. The greater incidence in the result originated in core in ation (CPIEFE: excluding foods and energy), particularly services, which had contributed 0.2pp to total CPI. The goods CPIEFE had fallen again, by a similar magnitude to the previous month, re ecting the exchange rate appreciation of recent months. As for the volatile elements, it was noted that, after a few months, fresh fruits and vegetables prices had returned to their usual seasonal patterns. Thus, in annual terms, headline in ation stood at 2.3% and core in ation at 1.9%. 
In ation expectations showed some downward adjustments at shorter terms, probably re ecting the effects of the exchange rate appreciation. However, at two years ahead, there were no changes with respect to the previous Meeting. This, possibly linked to the expected better economic performance in 2018 and 2019, which sustained the convergence of in ation. So, one year ahead, in ation insurance and the January EES had fallen by 10 bp to 2.4% and 2.6%, respectively, while the FBS of the second half of January continued to anticipate 2.5%. Two years ahead, expectations showed no big change. For January, the market projected that in ation would be between 0.1% and 0.2%. 
2. Background analysis and discussion 
Regarding external conditions, all the participants agreed that there had been additional progress, expressed in better global growth expectations, higher trade volumes, better commodity prices and still favorable nancial conditions for emerging economies. In this context, some participants noted that concerns were increasingly focused on the evolution of the monetary policies of developed countries, interest rates, and capital ows. 
As for the evolution of long-term interest rates, several participants noted that they had risen signi cantly in developed economies, but not in the generality of emerging economies. On this matter, some participants pointed out that the gradual rise in long rates was part of a necessary adjustment in the developed economies and that the most interesting thing was that they had not substantially altered the nancial conditions for emerging countries. About long-term rates in emerging economies, which had not increased, it was argued that this could be due to the fact that, given the cyclical position of some countries, no withdrawal of their monetary impulse was necessary. However, the fact that the emerging currencies had appreciated, while continuing to receive capital in ows, made this argument less plausible. Another hypothesis was that behind the different evolution of the long rates was the compression of the risk premia, which cancelled out the effect of the higher rates in the US. 
The increase in long-term interest rates in the developed economies was compared to the post taper tantrum scenario. It was pointed out that now, with a similar increase in magnitude, there had not been major disruptions in the nancial markets, a possibility that had been identi ed among the risks in the Monetary Policy Report. As the argument went, this was related to the fact that, unlike events of a few years ago, the current movement obeyed to an increase in the expected policy rate, rather than to changes in the term premium. Various participants mentioned that since the market had nally adjusted its expectations for the US monetary policy trajectory towards a closer vision to its authorities’ announcements, the risks associated with the process of normalization of monetary policy in that country had decreased, but still needed careful monitoring. 
Regarding the dollar weakening in global markets, several participants noted that it contrasted with the evolution of the US economy, particularly activity, the orientation of its monetary policy and scal policy decisions, so that it might be more related to the strength of other developed economies and changes in their future respective monetary policies. Given the international context, several participants pointed out that it was unclear whether the trend of the dollar depreciating would continue for much longer. 
About Latin America, some participants showed preoccupation for the political situation in some countries and how it could affect the evolution of investment and growth projections in the region. 
Regarding domestic background economic indicators, the evolution of the labor market was discussed, in particular, regarding the reasons behind the stagnant creation of private salaried jobs. One participant noted that this had not been accompanied by a greater adjustment to growth in real wages. One possible explanation, it was pointed out, was that rapid disin ation in a context of wage indexation had led to greater increases in real wages by inhibiting hiring. Other participants noted that microeconomic data evidence showed a high turnover in the local labor market, so wages could adjust relatively quickly, despite indexation. However, most of the participants showed some degree of concern about the slow growth in private salaried employment and its implications on the evolution of consumption. 
All the participants noted that the Imacec had surprised favorably, with variations above expectations in sectors linked to investment, including business services and construction. The latter had shown a much less negative gure than expected. Of course, several participants added that it was still premature to consider a growth scenario very different from the last Monetary Policy Report. 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
On the contrary, it was necessary to monitor if future data would con rm a trend change and the effect and meaning of the stagnant private salaried employment. In any case, for the time being it could be thought that the possibility of risk scenarios had decreased, where the economy failed to reach the growth rates needed to begin closing the activity gap. 
Regarding the recent evolution and the outlook of the construction sector, it was discussed how sustainable were the upward surprises observed in the last quarter of 2017. In this regard, one participant indicated that the pace of expansion in the fourth quarter seemed too unusual and fast as to think that it could be sustained in the coming quarters. Moreover, he added, history showed that these unusual movements in speed were not very persistent, and had been known to even change signs soon. Regarding the lines of the sector that generated this greater dynamic, it was noted that they were related to engineering projects, because those related to the housing sector continued to show limited performance. Another participant drew attention to the extra dif culty posed by using new sources of informating in construction activity after the 2013 Reference Compilation, which was the reason why it could be more dif cult to read the data velocity due to the lack of a long-spanning history of them. 
Several participants noted that private sector expectations, re ected in various surveys and analysts’ projections, pointed to better growth prospects for 2018, converging to the upper half of the range forecast in the Monetary Policy Report. All in all, several participants concluded that even if the better performance of recent months faded out in the future, it seemed enough to signi cantly reduce the risk of surprises in the closing of the activity gap estimated in the baseline scenario. 
All the participants agreed that the better outlook for activity growth pointed to some reduction in downside risks to medium-term in ation. They agreed that, although the short-term in ation projections were lower than had been estimated in the Monetary Policy Report, mainly due to the appreciation of the peso, the conditions for the convergence of in ation to 3% in the policy horizon were still present. They added that it was also striking that, in a context of an appreciated peso, in ation expectations at longer terms showed no change. Some participants added that available analyses showed that the appreciation of the peso since early December responded, generally, to the evolution of its fundamentals. On the other hand, the Bank’s analysis had pointed out that the magnitude of the pass-through to in ation depended largely on the sources of these exchange rate movements, and found that if these were due to changes in the international value of the foreign currency, its transmission to local prices was lower. All these factors together, a bounded appreciation of the peso and 
in line with fundamentals, and without effects on in ation expectations two years out, it was not clear for now that a monetary policy reaction was necessary. 
3. Analysis of monetary policy options2/ 
Based on this diagnosis, all the Board members estimated that the monetary policy options analyzed in the previous Meeting were still valid. Accordingly, they agreed that the relevant options were (i) to hold the MPR at 2.5%, but stating the concern about the effects of downward deviations in in ation and (ii) to lower the MPR by 25 bp to 2.25% with a possible downward bias. 
Option 1: to hold the MPR at 2.5% 
Several Board members agreed that this option was justi ed in a context where the December Report’s baseline scenario had strengthened, both because the economy was advancing along its foreseen trajectory, and the lower risks that threatened the convergence of in ation to the target. In effect, although the short-term in ation projections were reduced—mainly due to the appreciation of the peso—, in ation expectations for the medium term had not been largely affected. This, they noted, spoke of a transitory effect of relative prices correction, a situation that, as indicated previously, did not necessarily warrant an adjustment of the monetary stimulus. Various Board members noted this was consistent with the fact that the risks of a slower recovery of the national economy seemed to have diminished, adding the evolution of the external scenario. Furthermore, the option of holding the MPR constant also leaned on the fact that the local nancial markets had again shown positive development, reversing the rate hikes that caused concern in recent months. 
All the Board members pointed out that, although the most pertinent option was to hold the MPR at 2.5%, it should be stated that special attention had to be paid to possible downward deviations of in ation that could jeopardize its convergence to the target over the policy horizon. 
Option 2: to lower the MPR by 25pb 
Several Board members agreed that this option remained valid from the standpoint of controlling possible risks for the convergence of in ation. In this 
2/ In order to preserve the regulatory individual anonymity in the discussion, all the Board members are herein referred to as males, including female member Ms. Rosanna Costa. 
5 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
regard, one Board member said that, although these risks had abated—partly due to improved activity data—they were still not fully resolved, especially the risk of in ation being persistently low, signi cantly delaying its convergence to the target in the de ned horizons. In that sense, he believed that lowering the MPR would give a lot more security and would allow facing in a better way possible risk scenarios in one direction or the other. One Board member said that a more expansionary monetary policy would help to ensure the convergence of in ation to the target, particularly by cooperating in holding in ationary expectations around it. He added that this additional support might be necessary if consumption was affected by a slower recovery of the labor market and/or tighter credit conditions, or more pressures were coming from the exchange rate. 
Against this option, based on the risk scenarios rather than on the baseline scenario, several Board members agreed that it would be dif cult to communicate. This, because improved macroeconomic outlook and the lower risks for the convergence of in ation had been factored into market expectations. Some Board members added that there was a possibility that this option could be read as a more pessimistic turn in the Bank’s prospects relative to the previous baseline scenario, which could adversely affect expectations that had just begun to leave pessimism behind and, moreover, did not re ect reality. 
Regarding how an MPR cut would affect the economy, some Board members opined that in the context of better economic prospects both domestically and globally, the market was likely to interpret the MPR reduction as transitory, and therefore signi cantly limiting its incidence on the behavior of the economy. 
Finally, one Board member noted that, in any case, he thought it important to insist that in the conduct of timely monetary policy making, communicational considerations should be secondary and he thought that, partly because of the way decisions had been made in previous meetings, these considerations had taken up too much importance this time. 
4. Monetary policy decision 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel and Board members Vial, García and Costa, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 2.5%. 
