MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 230, held on 14 January 2016. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member; Mario Marcel, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Rodrigo Valdés. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Pablo Mattar, acting General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Mariela Iturriaga, acting Financial Operations Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policy Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Natalia Gallardo, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website1/. 
Information gathered during the month showed an economic scenario that was generally in line with the analysis presented in December’s Monetary Policy Report. In particular, the outlook of higher short-term in ationary pressures continued, which should gradually descend over the usual projection horizon. Thus, in ation was expected to return to the tolerance range in the second half of the year, with GDP still growing below potential over the larger part of 2016. In such context, the working assumption used to forecast the monetary policy rate (MPR) in said Report —namely, that the monetary policy stance would remain expansionary but with a partial, measured withdrawal of the monetary stimulus during 2016— was a valid reference for this meeting’s monetary policy decision. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
Incoming news also con rmed risks mostly biased downward for activity. Aside from the fact that the high basis of comparison would take rst-quarter growth clearly below 2%, which was already input in the Report’s outlook, the smaller- than-expected increase in the November Imacec, the still low con dence levels, the worsened international nancial markets, the drop in the copper price and the region’s deteriorated economic outlook, indicated that the risks identi ed in December were still totally present and, if anything, some of them had intensi ed during the month. Against that backdrop, the resilience of the labor market continued to put a positive note. However, because mean labor productivity was growing little or nothing and the growth prospects showed no sign of a fast recovery, it was natural to expect a downturn of labor market indicators. Besides, this combination of events was common to previous slowdown periods. 
As for risks, the worsening of international nancial conditions was certainly where the most notorious changes of the past month lied. It had not occurred as a consequence of the Federal Reserve Board (Fed)’s actions—actually, the markets’ reaction to the interest rate hike had been very benign—, but as a response to signi cant corrections in the Chinese stock market and uncommon variations in the Chinese exchange rate. Of course, this was a recent development still under way and it was thus premature to draw any de nitive conclusion. That said, a review of the facts suggested that the big asset price movements in China and around the world re ected rather the higher degree of risk aversion and the doubts about the future path of the Chinese exchange rate policy, than a more fundamental change in the growth outlook for the world economy in general, and China in particular. This was consistent with global activity numbers not showing any surprises, and with the clear ight to quality signals seen in the past several days. 
The in ationary implications of developments in China and, for these purposes, of several of the risks identi ed in the December Monetary Policy Report, were far from obvious. On one hand, the depreciated peso added pressure over short-term in ation and, more importantly for monetary policy, could delay the convergence to the target via second-round effects. How intense the latter could be would depend crucially on the persistence of the shock and its effects on activity, and a deterioration of activity by itself could pull down in ation in the medium term. Therefore, the effects on in ation’s convergence velocity would depend on the relative intensities of the different pass-through mechanisms. In this context, it was essential to continue to closely monitor both the short- and medium-term effects of these events. For the moment, the opinion of the Research Division was that there was not enough evidence to introduce any big change in the baseline scenario of the December Report. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Thus, the Research Division presented as the relevant options for the discussion of this meeting to either raise the MPR by 25 basis points, to 3.75%, or keep it at 3.5%. 
The option to raise the policy rate was justi ed in an environment of persistently high in ation, a still signi cantly resilient labor market and a clearly expansionary monetary policy stance, and considering that the convergence of in ation to the target might take longer than estimated, particularly taking into account that the new peso depreciation could last longer and, through second-round effects, could affect in ation in the medium term. 
The option of not moving the MPR was more consistent with the scenario proposed in December, which was still valid. In addition, the downward bias of activity and the still present risks on the matter, reduced the appeal of the option of anticipating the withdrawals of the monetary stimulus considered in the baseline scenario, all the more so if it could take the market by surprise. On the other hand, it would be wise to gather more information about the short- and medium-term effects of the various events occurred during the month, because the way they would affect the evolution of in ation was uncertain. Furthermore, the lower world price of oil and the fact that in ation had been lower than expected in December, would help in ation to converge as foreseen. Lastly, all these events occurred within a context where in ation expectations two years out remained well anchored to 3%, despite in ation at one year having changed signi cantly in the recent past. This was a clear sign that the market was con dent that the Central Bank was able of bringing in ation back to the target in the usual time. Thus, the Research Division estimated that the indicators reviewed at this meeting clearly supported the option of holding the MPR at 3.5%, while maintaining the upward bias. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
About the external scenario, all ve Board members agreed that the main news of the month was the higher volatility of nancial markets associated with developments in China. They stressed that doubts persisted about the size and form of the Chinese economic adjustment, the situation of its nancial system and the trajectory of its exchange rate. They opined that all that had triggered high nancial volatility and a further worsening of the prices of commodities, copper included. In Chile, the result had been additional pressures on the exchange rate. 
One Board member noted that, although the rise in the fed funds rate had caused no major turbulences, emerging economies had shown a weaker economic outlook. Especially in China, one could see the stress associated with the combination of exchange rate rigidities, weaker economic indicators, depreciating pressures, and the need for more expansionary policies. This short- term dilemma was compounded by two underlying tendencies: the intent to rebalance the economy towards services and consumption, and the success in achieving higher degrees of nancial integration. In his view, all these ingredients certainly posed a challenge to macroeconomic policies that was dif cult to address, which by now was adding to the turmoil and pessimism in global nancial markets and the depression of commodity prices. 
One Board member said that the external economy was exhibiting high volatility, associated to perceptions and expectations rather than speci c facts, and could only alter the baseline scenario of the latest Report if they persisted in time, which was yet to be seen. On one hand, what was most striking of recent weeks were the attacks on the renminbi and the plunge of the stock markets in China. Even if these pressures could be refrained, at least momentarily, through the intervention of the Chinese authorities, they unveiled the doubts that still existed about the evolution of the Chinese economy and its transformation process. In parallel, there had been new and sharp falls in the prices of oil and copper, as well as massive ows of capital towards assets and markets that were perceived to be safer, which had bene ted the dollar and diluted, for the moment, the potential impact of the Fed’s decision on the long-term interest rates. In his view, it was too early to risk a verdict on the duration of these changes. However, if they persisted, they would have a severe impact on the scal and external accounts of many commodity-exporting countries, including all oil dependent ones. This could lead to a less favorable scenario for emerging countries, and Chile in particular. However, he thought that it was too early to adjust the baseline scenario, because said shock, based primarily on perceptions, could be quickly reversed. 
One Board member advised being cautious about the effects of the different events in the external scenario. For one thing, they were too recent and, for another, there was good reason to think that the developments in China could be rather temporary. In any case, it was evident that the negative risk scenario described in the Report was now more likely to happen. He concluded that now everything seemed to indicate that 2016 would be a year in which market volatility would play an important role. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member said that he agreed, in general terms, with the idea that movements in the external scenario did not mean a change in the perception of the growth conditions China would face in 2016 and 2017—at least, this was what the evidence suggested—, but rather con rmed the slower growth scenario used in the analyses. In his opinion, the main informative content of the events of recent weeks were the dif culties that China was enduring to maintain the currency pegged to the dollar. In this sense, this was a manifestation of a late but necessary adjustment to the nancial conditions of the Chinese economy. So far, China’s monetary and foreign exchange policy had meant, all else being equal, somewhat less expansionary nancial conditions and a loss of reserves because of a reduced appetite for Chinese assets by both residents and non-residents. In his view, all this reaf rmed a latent risk scenario for the Chilean economy, which not necessarily would translate into a reduced growth outlook for our trading partners, the world or even China, but into a change in global nancial conditions that could be mirrored in the prices of assets and commodities, and in the nancial conditions of emerging countries. Therefore, he thought it could be audacious to view the recent events as an overreaction that should be undone shortly. Rather, he added, the necessary and much delayed adjustment might be starting in China, with potentially long-lasting nancial and foreign exchange consequences on commodity prices. Especially important in this scenario was how dif cult it was for the Chinese authorities to accept this adjustment, which could introduce signi cant volatilities in the months to come. He thought this was relevant for the analysis of the evolution of in ation in Chile, because while medium-term conditions continued to point at modest growth and thus less in ationary pressures stemming from output gaps and labor market conditions that could deepen going forward, short- and medium-term nancial conditions pointed at an aggravation of the risk perception in emerging economies and Chile, with the consequent impact on funding costs and the exchange rate. 
On the domestic front, all the Board members agreed that incoming news matched the December Report’s scenario. One Board member noted that —even before knowing the December indicators— the fourth quarter 2015’s economic activity had been disappointing, because of the worsened external scenario and pessimistic expectations, which had contributed to depress domestic demand. He added that, even though this was still consistent with a growth dynamic around 2%—which should be seen as good news in an emerging country comparison—, activity continued to grow signi cantly below the Chilean economy’s potential, widening the output gap with respect to potential GDP growth. Moreover, the new information available con rmed the transitory nature of the rebound in investment observed during the third quarter of last year and revealed a reversal of growth posted by some sectors, which left few factors of economic dynamism at the beginning of 2016. As for in ation, he added that he saw a deep depression 
of fuel prices associated with the dynamics of the international oil market, while the slowdown in wages continued, with nominal growth in twelve months going from 7% in November 2014 to 5.5% in November 2015. This had resulted in zero in ation in November and December of 2015, with a deceleration of the CPIEFE for services in December that had undone the upward surprises of previous months. All this had kept the market’s expectations for 2016’s in ation below the projections in the December Monetary Policy Report. 
One Board member drew attention to the sharp contraction of natural resource related sectors and the resilience of the labor market. He added that the wage and price dynamics suggested that the one-time effects of the exchange rate depreciation of the past few quarters were easing. The latest depreciation of the peso had been essentially linked to the strengthening of the dollar against emerging currencies in general, and, in fact, the peso did not seem to have weakened any more than other comparable currencies. In his view, all this supported the diagnosis that the Chilean economy had continued to advance in an adequate macro adjustment process, which was very important given the new circumstances of the external environment. 
One Board member drew attention to the fact that the slowdown of labor costs had continued further, and at some point it would affect non-tradable in ation which, however, was still growing above its historic averages. Meanwhile, the exchange rate had risen, which could result in increased pressures on in ation in the short term and a further delay in the convergence with the target. He also said that the labor market was still resilient, in particular the unemployment rate, but also with a non-negligible increase in employment. Still, he said, the slowdown in wages and the increase in the number of part-time jobs could be signaling wider gaps in the near future. Precisely, that had been the expectation for several quarters and it had not occurred. The services sector continued to grow above the mean rates, which could be explained, together with the housing boom, by the robust creation of jobs given the phase of the business cycle that the economy was in. 
About the monetary policy decision, all the Board members agreed that the options proposed by the Research Division were the right ones. One Board member noted that signs observed after the publication of the Report had rati ed the downward bias of output, while on the prices side some indications of relative price adjustments had emerged, which should translate into a reduction in cost pressures. All this reaf rmed the need to maintain the measured trajectory in the normalization of monetary policy, which meant holding the MPR unchanged this time and be cautious about the upcoming adjustments. However, he added, there were aspects that called for careful monitoring. The rst one had to do with external volatility and its impact on the Chilean economy. In his opinion, 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
the various scenarios did not necessarily lead to higher in ation in the medium term, because a normalization of the markets, a reversal of the peso depreciation, a steeper drop in commodity prices and the consequent weakening of Chile’s economic activity, all led to reduced supply- or demand-side in ationary pressures scenarios. A second issue concerned the behavior of the labor market. Even though it was still resilient to the evolution of economic activity, one should wonder about its possible path if downside risks for activity materialized in 2016. In this regard, it was worth noting that although the aggregate gures coming from the employment and wage surveys remained in positive territory, direct and indirect signs of weakening were beginning to emerge. The National Statistics Institute (INE)’s remuneration survey revealed not only a systematic slowdown in nominal wages since late 2014, but the gures for hours worked and jobs from surveys to establishments showed a more pronounced deterioration of the better quality jobs in relation to salaried employment gures compiled by the employment surveys. This combined with a deterioration in workers’ perceptions about their own situation in several complementary surveys. He added that all this helped to support his decision to keep the policy rate at 3.5% and emphasize the measured pace of future adjustments until there was clear evidence of a change of direction in the evolution of the output gap or of similar or higher in ationary pressures compared with the latest Report’s projections. 
One Board member noted that the most relevant option was to keep the MPR at 3.5%. This held whether they considered that the baseline scenario of the Monetary Policy Report was still valid, or if they judged that any of the identi ed risk scenarios that backed the downward bias of the growth outlook, was materializing. In this context, and with a Report that had implied a gradual normalization of the monetary stimulus in place, only later in the year, and with risk scenarios that involved keeping the MPR constant still for some time, it was natural that the option to keep the MPR at its current level was most appropriate. He said he continued to believe it necessary to monitor the external scenario with special care, because it was abroad that the main deviations from the Report’s scenario for growth and in ation could occur, which would have the greatest implications on the conduct of monetary policy. 
One Board member said he agreed that the relevant options were to either keep the MPR or raise it by 25 basis points. However, given the views expressed in the Report, this was not the time to raise it. He insisted that these few months would be important to dispel doubts about the differences between the Bank’s view on in ation and the vision of some of the market players. It was thus unwise to anticipate the interest rate trajectory depicted in the Report. The new developments in the international economy also pointed to the need to wait and see if the commodity price declines and the dollar appreciation persisted at the global level. 
One Board member mentioned that recently there had been increased tension between high in ationary pressures in the short term and lower in the medium term. This did not necessarily show up in the short-term in ation outlook, which could even be marginally lower due to the signi cant drop in the oil price, but it did re ect in the higher short-term exchange rate risks. At the same time, the latest events also pointed to a situation where access to credit could be less favorable for a lengthy period of time. All this, combined with the deteriorated panorama in Latin America, was an important risk that needed monitoring. He concluded by noting that monetary policy should properly balance these two situations and, for the time being, he justi ed the vision of gradual normalization assumed in the Report, that for this meeting was clearly in favor of not changing the MPR. 
One Board member indicated that, for now, information was insuf cient for any change in the projections or proposed courses of action with respect to the Report. In this sense, the option of raising the MPR was consistent with in ation being still above the tolerance range, with in ation’s persistence having been and still being stronger than expected; with gaps that, although wider, were modest; and with new exchange rate pressures that could have more lasting effects. Meanwhile, the option to keep the MPR unchanged was consistent with the message in the Report. If there were no major changes since then in the in ation outlook, it did not seem reasonable to change the trajectory then assumed, which contemplated no further rise at this meeting. In addition, expectations remained anchored in the forecast horizon and the labor cost, while still growing more than its historical average, had seen a signi cant slowdown. Although in ation had been above the tolerance range for more than a year and a half, monetary policy had been highly expansionary and was expected to remain so for several more months. The moderate growth below potential and in ation expectations anchored to the target so warranted. This expansionary monetary policy had been key to contain the slowdown in activity and for the resilience of the labor market. However, as noted in the last Report and in previous meetings, for in ation to converge with the target it was necessary to take on a path of gradual and moderate reduction of the monetary stimulus. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Claro and Board Members Vial, García and Marcel, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3.5%. 
