MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY 
MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 206 held on 16 January 2014. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board member; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Also present: Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Kevin Cowan, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Advisory Department Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communications of Monetary Policy Manager; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Erika Arraño, Executive Secretary to the Governor’s Cabinet; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
2. Options 
Based on the data known after the last meeting, the Research Division presented as relevant options keeping the monetary policy rate (MPR) at 4.50% or lowering it by 25 basis points, to 4.25%. 
Internationally, incoming information since the last meeting was in line with the baseline scenario of December’s Monetary Policy Report. Chile’s trading partners continued to grow somewhat below their historical average, but still anticipated a gradual recovery in the coming quarters. Copper prices remained 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
at record-highs but, as already noted, the global mining investment cycle was losing strength. The Federal Reserve had begun to reduce its asset purchases. However, in most developed economies in ation was below their respective targets, which anticipated that the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus programs in place would be very gradual. Since mid-2013, nancial conditions facing emerging economies have remained tighter than at the beginning of the year. 
In connection with the recent behavior of in ation and its implications for monetary policy, aside from some one-time episodes related to perishable foodstuffs and energy, the recent CPI increase re ected the impact of the peso depreciation. In an economy like Chile, with exible exchange rate and a high share of imported goods in the consumer basket, a temporary increase in short-term in ation was considered a common development in a scenario where domestic demand was weakening, interest rates were declining and the currency was depreciating. In any case, it was important to monitor that second- round effects of these shocks on other prices, wages and expectations would remain bounded. At the current situation, no secondary effects were detected on in ation expectations, nominal wages or services in ation. In addition, such effects were expected to be limited, to the extent that agents perceived that slack in nal and factor markets was widening, not narrowing. 
With regard to the options to analyze in this meeting, the alternative of lowering the MPR was consistent with the vision of the last Report. For several quarters, economic activity and, in particular, sectors other than natural resources had been growing below trend. This was taking pressure off installed capacity utilization and, at some point in time, would also re ect in an easing of conditions in the labor market. Recent data showed that the slowdown in the economy had deepened further and some investment related indicators had fallen short of expectations. If persistent, this would trigger a downward revision of the economic outlook and of the prospects for medium-term in ationary pressures, which would call for a stronger than expected monetary impulse. 
The alternative of keeping the MPR unchanged could be justi ed in that the Chilean economic slowdown had been gradual and cuts had recently been made to the policy rate, which were in operation and would continue to gradually affect those demand components most sensitive to funding costs. Credit was owing normally to households and rms. Meanwhile, the peso had depreciated in real terms to near its historic average, which would also help rebalance the economy’s sources of growth. Although it was clear that the impulse of mining- related investment had reduced, other components of demand could continue to support its growth. The nancial situation of consumers was sound, labor income was growing within the range of previous quarters and, on average, 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
con dence was still on the optimistic side. Capacity levels of companies were tight and a recovery of inventories was expected in some sectors. 
In any case, holding the MPR in this meeting was consistent with the possibility of increasing the monetary impulse in the near future. In that sense, holding the rate constant would allow waiting for additional information about output and in ation trends, the impact of the cuts already made and thus, it would help to better calibrate the future adjustments of monetary policy. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
Turning to the external scenario, all the Board members noted that incoming news pointed to a consolidation of the better prospects in the developed world, especially the United States. They also agreed that the scenario for emerging economies foresaw lower momentum, and highlighted the risks in China. They concluded that the global scenario was similar to or somewhat more benign than the one depicted in the last Monetary Policy Report. 
Domestically, all the Board members underscored the weak performance of investment, especially in machinery and equipment. One Board member pointed out that this seemed to go beyond what could be associated only with the weaker cycle of investment in mining and related activities. All the Board members stressed that private consumption, although gradually slowing, was still sound. Some Board members noted that the trend of the overall economy should result in slower consumption growth. 
All the Board members agreed that in the last two months economic activity had been less dynamic than expected, especially those components not directly linked to natural resources. They also agreed that, for the time being, there was ground to believe that output would remain fairly strong in the coming quarters, but the new scenario was clearly one of lower growth rates. One Board member said that the economy was slowing somewhat faster than anticipated in the Report, a development that required continued monitoring. He said that the end of the inventory depletion process, combined with increased external demand and solid labor and consumer markets should allow for moderate growth, beyond the normal volatilities in month to month gures. 
As for in ation, all the Board members agreed that, although in recent months the CPI had risen slightly more than forecast, its behavior seemed consistent with the price adjustments resulting from the depreciation of the peso. They also indicated that there had been no deviations from the target of expected 
in ation over the relevant horizon. One Board member added that, in any case, what had dissipated completely was the concern of running too-low an in ation rate. Other Board member noted that, while in ation was the basic objective of the Central Bank and therefore, it should monitor its trends on a permanent basis, there seemed to be no major risks in the medium term in this area. It was therefore important that the Central Bank, as had been its traditional policy, would not react or overestimate data that could be re ecting one-time events rather than trends. One Board member noted that the information since the last Meeting was mixed, in terms of somewhat less strong economic indicators and somewhat higher in ation gures. However, after weighting them, he thought that the outlook indicated that in ation would remain in check. He said it was important to mention that in the coming months the annual gures could be close to 4%, in the context of not so strong activity and reduced in ationary pressures from abroad. 
With regard to the monetary policy decision, all the Board members agreed that the alternatives put forward by the Research Division were the most plausible ones. One Board member noted that, with the latest data, the biggest concern seemed to be how intense the economic deceleration would be, so it was reasonable to foresee that the next movement of the MPR would be downwards. He thought it prudent, however, to pause for a while before taking action in that direction. It would allow to con rm such trends and to avoid creating confusion about a worsening of expectations about the future evolution of the economy. 
One Board member noted that both the background information and the medium-term risk evaluation confirmed that some additional, marginal adjustments to the MPR were necessary. Therefore, the decision of this meeting had to do more with the timing of such adjustment than whether it was needed or not. He added that lowering the MPR this time could surprise the market and give the impression that the slowdown in output and demand was more severe than estimated, which was not warranted by the available information. Therefore, keeping the MPR at this time and anticipating a bounded adjustment was more consistent with the forecast scenario, and gave more room for future monetary policy decisions, considering the challenges that the coming quarters could bring. 
One Board member said he concurred with the view that the process of adjusting the MPR had not been completed yet. However, there were some elements to be carefully weighted before making a decision. In his opinion, given the current circumstances, it was more advisable to hold the MPR while introducing a signal in the monetary policy stance. This would give a more accurate indication of the next steps and would also allow for an orderly conclusion of this adjustment 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
cycle. In addition, it would minimize risks and facilitate the conduct of monetary policy going forward. 
One Board member noted that, in his opinion, neither option clearly dominated the other. On the one hand, the option of lowering the MPR was more consistent with a somewhat faster than expected deceleration and lower projections for the rst half of this year. It was also consistent with the scenario outlined in the Monetary Policy Report. However, the best timing was unclear and it actually was not expected to occur at this meeting. On the other hand, keeping the MPR constant was more compatible with the fact that no big deviation had occurred from the forecasts in the last Monetary Policy Report. The labor market was still strong, while consumption, despite some recent slowdown, also remained strong. Credit had also continued to grow at substantial rates. He added that he thought it more plausible not to change the MPR but to introduce a downward signal. Economic activity was showing lower than expected gures, but there were elements that should put a stop to this deceleration. Furthermore, an additional month bought time for a more thorough evaluation of recent in ation data. Although it was interpreted as a one-time increase phenomenon, it could not be guaranteed to continue that way. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara and Board members Marshall, Claro and Vial, to keep the annual monetary policy rate at 4.50%. 
