MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY 
MEETING The monetary policy session N° 194 was held on 17 January 2013. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board member; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Present the Minister of Finance, Felipe Larraín. 
Also present, Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Pablo Mattar, acting General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Claudio Raddatz, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Luis Opazo, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Consultant Manager of Communications; Enrique Orellana, Monetary Policy Strategy and Communication Manager; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publically available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s web site 1/. 
2. Options 
On this occasion, with the information gathered since the last meeting, the Research Division presented as the relevant option to keep the monetary policy interest rate (MPR) at 5.0%. 
1/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
There were few news since the publication of the Monetary Policy Report and they did not alter either the international or the local scenario described in it. The negative risk of a sharp scal adjustment in the United States had moderated somewhat, but other risks remained on the scal front. Moreover, the situation in the Eurozone, despite increased market optimism, was still fragile. 
Domestically, the labor market and installed capacity utilization were still tight. However, core in ation, which excludes food and energy, remained contained, below 2% y-o-y. One striking feature was the moderate response of in ation and nominal wages to the dynamism of the cycle. Still, it was necessary to consider that the relationship between these variables—in ation and the cycle—did not necessarily move contemporaneously and the in ationary effects of increased activity could operate with time lags. In addition, the recent exchange rate appreciation could have helped to moderate in ationary pressures temporarily. 
Meanwhile, a possible acceleration of productivity, as suggested by some indicators, could also have contributed to moderate nominal cost pressures. However, this hypothesis needed further evidence and cautious evaluation, since the measurement of productivity tended to be procyclical. 
The recent pattern of growth driven by domestic demand had resulted in a widening of the current account de cit which, as previously noted, if it continued and expanded, could become a factor of greater external vulnerability of the Chilean economy. Addressing this issue, however, went beyond monetary policy and required coordinating a number of economic and nancial policies. 
Accordingly, it was estimated that maintaining the MPR was justi ed in its current level being within a range of neutral values. Moreover, the current level was consistent with in ation converging to the target within the projection horizon. 
As in previous occasions, the option to cut the MPR could be justi ed as a preventive measure facing the risk of a more pronounced slowdown in growth or a more lasting decline in in ation. The former could occur if any of the external risk scenarios referred to in the last Monetary Policy Report would materialize. However, the likelihood of these scenarios, at least in the short term, seemed to have eased. Furthermore, the indicators reviewed did not anticipate an impending slowdown in domestic demand and output over the coming months. 
Meanwhile, the dynamism already accumulated by output and employment, coupled with the stability of inflation expectations around 3%, led to forecast that the low in ation gures of the recent months were a temporary phenomenon, which within the projection horizon should normalize toward 3%. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Therefore, like in the previous month, the option of cutting down the MPR was dismissed. 
The option of raising the MPR was also ruled out this time. Although it could be warranted to respond to the recent dynamic of domestic spending, it was necessary to note that, in contrast, the acceleration of GDP growth in sectors other than natural resources—more closely linked to the price dynamics— had been milder. In turn, core in ation indicators as well as private in ation expectations were consistent with the target. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
About the international scenario, all the Board members agreed that global nancial conditions had improved in the last month and underscored the recent scal agreement in the United States. With respect to world activity indicators known during the month, they concluded that these were in line with the scenario depicted in December 2012’s Monetary Policy Report. 
Despite the better news coming from abroad, all the Board members noted that the calm recently observed in nancial markets could be fragile, in particular because of the situation in the Eurozone. Also because of yet unresolved scal issues in the United States, a fact that, as noted by one Board member had already resulted in some risk-rating agencies expressing their willingness to downgrade the country’s debt. One Board member said that the impact of the new scal stimulus program in Japan had to be carefully monitored due to its effects on the size of the Japanese debt. One Board member drew attention to the fact that the slowdown in Germany and its decision to have a zero scal de cit tended to increase the effort that the other Eurozone economies would need to make. This Board member recalled that, when this region’s problems broke out, the combined balances of payments were in equilibrium with respect to the rest of the world, and that imbalances were an internal phenomenon. For the same reason, the resolution of mismatches called for signi cant adjustments within the region. 
On the domestic scene, all the Board members stressed the dynamism of output. However, one Board member mentioned that there were signs pointing to a moderation in expenditure. Consumption continued to grow hand in hand with GDP, while in the margin, imports and investment seemed to have grown slightly less than in previous months. In any case, this Board member noted, these gures were exhibiting high volatility, so it would be necessary to wait for more information to have a more accurate view. 
Some Board members commented that the trade balance indicators of year’s end showed an increase in external demand, particularly because of higher export value for copper, with the consequent reduction in inventory build-up. This, they added, suggested that the current account de cit for the year 2012 would be smaller than foreseen in the Monetary Policy Report. In the opinion of one Board member, this difference did not affect the essence of the concerns expressed in said Report with respect to the risks associated with the evolution of expenditure and output, but they did reveal that for the moment no signi cant departure was observed in this dimension. 
One Board member noted that recently, the level of the current account de cit had been consistently higher than projections. However, one striking aspect was that the most likely development would be that the scal balance looked better than foreseen and even better than the very rule of the public sector. Thus, the expansion of the current account de cit was partly justi ed by price changes, but also by a bigger de cit in the current account of the private sector. This latter trajectory entailed risks if it persisted, and required close monitoring. 
Several Board members commented that the domestic nancial conditions had not changed materially and loans continued to grow slowly. One Board member noted that notwithstanding this, the banking industry was behaving prudently, which re ected in a milder evolution of credit than during other expansionary cycles. 
Several Board members showed concern because in the current context of low in ation, wages continued to grow at high rates. One Board member highlighted the diversity of hypotheses on the matter, which in his view called for close attention, especially if core in ation forecasts for the coming months were very low, and expected y-o-y headline in ation was around 2%. 
One Board member expressed his concern about the evolution of relative prices. In particular, the real exchange rate had appreciated slightly in the last month, but accumulated a substantial appreciation throughout 2012. Thus, he noted, it now was in the lower part of the range where the level of the real exchange rate was consistent with the long-term fundamentals of the Chilean economy. Meanwhile, real wages were growing very fast, more than could be explained by in ation dynamics pure and simple. This trajectory of relative prices, if persistent, entailed risks and had to be given much attention. 
Several Board members underscored the long-lasting expansionary policies in the developed world, which put additional pressure on emerging economies, particularly Chile. One Board member contended that this scenario—with high 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
commodity prices and favorable nancing conditions—con rmed pressures for a peso valuation and capital ows towards developing countries with strong fundamentals, as was Chile. This Board member concluded stating that such a scenario continued to be the ground where the discussion should take place, and the one that posed challenges to the Chilean economy. One Board member pointed out that, given the low level of interest rates in the developed world, the fact that Chile kept its interest rate within a range considered neutral obviously put pressure on potential arbitrages going forward. Although this had not become very visible so far, in the last month the on-shore spreads—the interest rate differential with respect to the comparable international interest rate—had narrowed in the margin but, at the same time, the reduction in the stamp tax reduced the cost of currency arbitrage operations. This was one issue that, in his opinion, had to be reviewed carefully, because in the future it would be a signi cant source of pressures over relative prices. 
Regarding the monetary policy decision, all the Board members concluded that the best option was to maintain the MPR at 5%. One Board member said that although the balance of risks remained unbiased and therefore it was dif cult to justify any other option, changes had occurred that should not be neglected. The risks from abroad—and particularly those associated with extreme scenarios—had eased. Meanwhile, on the domestic front, the risk of demand remaining as—or slightly less—dynamic persisted. However, a risk had begun to appear, perhaps only just so, that in ation would remain very low for longer than forecast. Thus, in ation trajectory and the factors underlying it should be cause for close monitoring and analysis. In any case, he went on, in the current circumstances, neither raising nor lowering the MPR was reasonable. He nished adding that no monetary policy decision could overlook the fact that the interest rate differential with respect to the developed economies was very high, and became even higher if real interest rates were used. Furthermore, in the present circumstances, monetary policy had seen its degrees of freedom reduced, so the application of measures that would support or strengthen policy actions could not be discarded 
One Board member noted that, in the current context, the most prudent decision in the short term was to keep the MPR where it was. However, it should be emphasized that the risks in the world economy were still present, while local risks, in his view, had increased. 
One Board member said that from a monetary policy perspective, the opposing forces seen in recent months remained, although it was possible that both were showing early signs of moderation. At least the extremely negative international scenarios seemed to be losing strength, while an acceleration of domestic output 
and expenditure also seemed less likely. This, while recognizing that risks, both external— particularly in the Eurozone—and internal, were still present. In this scenario, he said, the option to raise the interest rate was a complex one. The present situation involved great international liquidity, with a quite high MPR by international standards, and where both headline and expected in ation were particularly contained. Plus the fact that external risks persisted and a sharper deceleration of domestic output and demand in the coming months could not be ruled out. Finally, the most dynamic component of domestic demand was related to long-term investment projects which, for these purposes, could be fairly exogenous. The decision to lower the MPR was not appropriate either, because the signs of internal deceleration were still dim and uncertain and, in fact, its level was still high. Moreover, the labor market and output gaps had remained tight. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided to maintain the monetary policy rate at 5.0% annually. Voting for this action, Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board members Marshall, Claro and Vial. 
