MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING 
Monetary policy meeting No. 218, held on 15 January 2015. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Enrique Marshall, Vice-Governor; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Alberto Arenas. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Mauricio Álvarez, acting General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website 2/. 
During the past month, the main news came from abroad. In particular, the continuing decline of commodity prices that took WTI oil below US$50 per barrel and copper near US$2.5 per pound. Although these movements meant deviating signi cantly from the gures in December’s Monetary Policy Report, it was premature to assess its medium-term economic implications internationally and domestically, which would depend critically on the persistency and relative composition of the underlying supply, demand, and purely nancial factors. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
Anyway, the latest correction to commodity prices had been associated with higher uncertainty, mainly because of the potential short-term nancial effects this situation could generate. This, coupled with developments in Russia and Greece, had had negative effects on the nancial conditions of emerging economies, Chile included. Emerging countries’ sovereign spreads had risen, capital ows had diminished, and stock markets had been revised downwards. Accordingly, the currencies of these economies, especially those more intensively based on commodities, had depreciated against the dollar. 
The ip side of the coin was the drop in long-term interest rates in developed economies whose assets acted as safe havens in these conditions. The low levels of the US long-term interest rates, while helping to mitigate the rising sovereign premiums, increased the risk associated to a sudden reversal of this variable. On the other side, the lower fuel price had resulted in reductions in both actual and expected in ation around the world, which together with the ever more likely adoption of a quantitative easing program in the Eurozone, had helped to further strengthen the dollar. In this context, it was very likely that in the short run there would be episodes of increased nancial volatility and new depreciations of emerging currencies. 
Despite the risks and uncertainties relating to these changes, incoming data suggested that the world economic outlook contained in the December Report continued to hold. The US economy was looking strong and the Eurozone would be able to grow at a moderate pace. Financial conditions, while not as comfortable as before, were still favorable and the prices of oil and copper were expected to return to their long-term values within 18 to 24 months. Thus, the information available on the international economy did not justify changing the path of the monetary policy rate (MPR) suggested in the December Report, which already incorporated a large part of the impact of the fuel price decline on prices and output. 
The domestic economy had performed as expected, i.e. ending 2014 with a low annual growth rate, but higher than those of previous quarters. These were expected to rise as the levels of local con dence picked up, provided that there would be no negative surprises coming from abroad. The impulse from the expansionary monetary policy of recent months seemed adequate and, without a doubt, had contributed to a more gradual adjustment process, helping to keep market interest rates low and smoothing the adjustment of relative prices. The labor market had been unexpectedly dynamic, with the unemployment rate down to 6.1% in November. These good numbers seemed to contradict economic indicators to some extent, but since most of the new jobs were in self- employment and without a written contract, and real wage growth was declining, 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
these were signs that the labor market had been adjusting, albeit slowly. Despite the above, nominal wage growth had accelerated, re ecting the impact of high past in ation gures, a phenomenon that could add increased inertia to those in ation components that were more closely linked to the value of labor. 
The sharper drop in fuel prices had taken annual CPI in ation slightly below projections, to 4.6% in December. It had also contributed to adjusting downward the in ation outlook at the end of 2015. Core in ation, meanwhile, typically more linked to the evolution of medium-term in ation, had been somewhat more dynamic than expected, partly because of the effects of the sharper depreciation of the peso and partly because of this variable’s inherent inertia. Projections were that CPIEFE in ation would remain above 4% until the end of the rst quarter and would later stand somewhat below 4% for several months. 
The oil price evolution had helped to revise down in ation by more than one percentage point in a few months. This correction, which would still leave in ation at a high level, certainly mitigated the risk of greater second-round effects or a possible upward turn in medium-term expectations that had been discussed in previous months. However, absent any major risks to the convergence of in ation in the medium term, it was not clear that monetary policy should respond to changes in in ation associated with supply-side shocks, as was the case here. 
However, recognizing that the current situation —crisscrossed by the opposing effects on in ation of low activity and exchange rate movements; by a signi cant level of uncertainty regarding the output gaps; by the possibility of abrupt changes in international nancial conditions; and by surprises in the evolution of international prices of fuels and other commodities— made the projection of in ation and other macroeconomic variables particularly complex, while nothing suggested the need to make any changes in the MPR trajectory in the short term. 
Therefore, the Research Division proposed as the only relevant option to keep the MPR at 3%. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
All the Board members agreed that the main macroeconomic developments originated abroad, particularly the continuing decline in the price of commodities, mainly oil and copper. One Board member noted that last month’s positive and negative news seemed to con gure a riskier external scenario. 
About the prices of commodities, one Board member indicated that since this was a widespread phenomenon affecting manufactured goods and fuels, one could certainly attribute substantial part to a demand that was rising less than expected and therefore important not to underestimate the potential depth and extent of this decline. He added that, as this coincided with the dollar remaining strong globally for a period that could easily last more than a year, this cycle of low prices would probably persist at least throughout the whole of 2015. In the case of copper, it was clear that the scal institutions in place would help to cushion, though not eliminate, its negative effect, especially if it lasted longer and began re ecting in trend price forecasts, as had happened during the upward cycle. In his view, increased risk aversion around the world and capital owing out of emerging countries could restrict their capacity to implement countercyclical policies if said prices remained low for too long. 
One Board member said that there was good reason to continue to work with a scenario where supply-side phenomena were the main determinants of the drop in the oil price, but its propagation to other commodities allowed questioning such hypothesis. On one hand, with the available information on world output and demand, it seemed implausible that the drop in commodity prices —particularly copper— could be due to a weaker world economy. On the other hand, information was insuf cient about the nancial factors that could be affecting the price of the metal. In his opinion, for the time being, the reasonable thing to do was to follow closely the evolution of the copper price, considering that a further decline could have important effects on the exchange rate and the scal side, and that a further deterioration of the copper market, especially with weak medium-term prospects, could have an even greater effect on falling mining investment, which nonetheless was still high in terms of GDP points. 
One Board member noted that it was dif cult to predict whether the commodity price adjustments would settle or reverse, totally or partially. It was also hard to de ne or gauge at this point all their possible real and nancial effects on the world economy, but they did signal the presence of higher risks than had been considered so far. From this perspective, one had to understand the ongoing concern generated by several emerging economies with weak fundamentals and high dependence on oil and other commodities, including Russia and some Latin American countries. Also Greece, although for different reasons, had become again a cause for concern and attention. As a result, risk aversion had increased in nancial markets and, as usual in these circumstances, the dollar had strengthened. Still, the growth forecast for 2015 had not been modi ed signi cantly. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
On the domestic front, all the Board members agreed that output and demand indicators of the last month were in line with the December Report’s baseline scenario, which re ected some stabilization in recent months. One Board member noted that, for now, gures for output, foreign trade and employment signi cantly reduced the probability of occurrence of the risk of reduced domestic demand that had been mentioned in the Report. In any case, he said, to assess the timing and speed of the recovery it was necessary to analyze how expectations would behave in the coming months and how the lower copper price would affect them. One Board member stressed that consumer and business expectations were still quite low, although in the last month consumer expectations had shown a slight rebound that could be related to the fuel price adjustments. 
Turning to in ation, one Board member noted that the low gure of December should not be taken as a won battle. In his view, the evolution of nominal wages, the CPIEFE and the recent depreciation of the peso called for close monitoring of this variable. One Board member said that the evolution of core in ation con rmed the impact the peso depreciation had had on in ation, and it also suggested that the discussion on the level of output gaps and the dif culties in measuring them was still valid. He added that, essentially, the forecast that in ation would achieve 3% during the second half of 2015 was still valid too, and that, considering the information at hand, the thought that in ation could post a sharp drop —derived from some market prices— did not seem to have much merit. 
One Board member opined that, though striking, the last monthly gure responded to very speci c factors. Lately, he said, monthly in ation rates had been quite volatile and would probably continue to be so for some months. Still, the medium-term outlook had not changed, as estimates continued to foresee annual in ation converging to the target in the coming quarters. However, he thought that this could take longer than anticipated, despite the sharp correction in the price of fuels. 
One Board member emphasized that in ation had ended 2014 above 4%, which could not leave the Central Bank satis ed. Still, it was also more than a full percentage point less than the October gure, and everything seemed to suggest that in ation was converging to the tolerance range, as projected. However, he added, some unfavorable indicators raised some red ags. Nominal wages continued to rise strongly, in line with low unemployment and past in ation. Actual and projected core in ation had been revised upward, which if not quickly reversed could be signaling higher in ation persistence going forward. The decline in actual in ation was a good news because it mitigated the risk of 
increased propagation to future in ation and wages, but so far the lower gures of the last two months obeyed primarily to the drop in fuel prices. Moreover, the peso depreciation, the main development behind the increase in in ation in 2014, had intensi ed in recent weeks. He added that the sharp drop in the oil price was very good news in ation-wise but, in general, facing supply-side shocks the optimal monetary policy reaction was less intense than when the shock came from the demand side. He recalled that in fact that was the principle that had been applied throughout 2014 when, despite the supply shocks that had pushed in ation up, the MPR had been lowered signi cantly. 
Regarding the monetary policy decision, all ve Board members agreed that the only plausible option was to keep the MPR at 3%. One Board member noted that the background information provided internally was consistent with the baseline scenario in the last Monetary Policy Report, in terms of prospects for higher growth and lower in ation in 2015 compared to 2014. However, he noted that the main news came from abroad and the direction they could take was unclear. However, in his opinion, the downward effect on in ationary pressures would dominate. As for the oil price, if the fall was due to a supply shock, it would mitigate total in ationary pressures, ease in ation dynamics, reduce costs and also mitigate core in ationary pressures. He did not think that the positive effect on disposable income would be large enough to offset the disin ationary impact already mentioned. On the other hand, if the factors underlying the lower commodity prices re ected a slowdown in global activity, this implied lower growth and a deteriorated outlook for emerging economies, which would also have disin ationary implications into the medium term. 
One Board member noted that the bulk of information analyzed, plus the fact that the MPR was clearly expansionary, the headline in ation records, the signs of relative strength in the labor market and the risks derived from the observed exchange rate volatility, particularly in the short term, totally justi ed holding the MPR at 3%. 
One Board member said that it was dif cult to propose any other option than holding the MPR at 3%. The scenario depicted in the Report remained valid and making adjustments or corrections was not prudent so shortly after its publication. Thus, he thought best to give signs of stability in monetary policy, at least for some time. He also said that some events had to be thoroughly assessed before introducing changes in the diagnosis and policy strategy. Still, none of them was alien to the scenario described in the Report. 
One Board member stressed that monetary policy had acted with determination and was clearly expansionary. The long-term rates had continued to decline and 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
were at or near record lows. Furthermore, their effects were being re ected in the market interest rates, particularly on mortgages, but also in those of other loans. In this scenario, the only plausible option was to keep the MPR at 3%. Raising it would be out of line with the cyclical state of the economy and with in ation, which was expected to continue falling. Lowering it implied taking a position that, in his view, would be inconsistent with the above risks of more persistent in ation. It should be noted that some of these risks have been materializing. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marshall, and Board members Claro, Vial and García, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3%. 
