MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary Policy Meeting No. 242, held on 19 January 2017. 
Present: Mario Marcel, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Rodrigo Valdés. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Pablo Mattar, acting General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Ricardo Consiglio, acting Financial Operations Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policy Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Matías Bernier, Domestic Financial Market Manager; Wildo González, Head of Conjuncture Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Carlos Medel, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website1/. 
From the analysis of the past Meeting and December’s Monetary Policy Report it had been concluded that the lower in ation outlook combined with somewhat weaker activity would call for an MPR cut of 50 basis points (bp) during the rst part of the year. This impulse would have to be undone as macroeconomic conditions returned to normality. In this context, the Research Division suggested to focus the meeting’s discussion on the convenience of expediting or delaying the materialization of such cut and analyzing the decision in light of the risk balance and associated costs. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
For this meeting, incoming news reaf rmed said tendencies for both in ation and output. 
About activity, November’s Imacec had been lower than expected, with a signi cant negative surprise in non-natural-recourse sectors, which had posted a meager 0.4% in annual terms. As usual, this index had re ected some transitory and some apparently more persistent components, but the overall evaluation was that the gure re ected a still very weak economy. This was accompanied by consumer and business expectations that, beyond some marginal changes, remained at very low levels, with investment showing no signs of recovery, near zero growth in salaried employment and a still high degree of internal and external uncertainty. The information collected so far in the survey for the Business Perception Report (BPR) scheduled for publication a couple of weeks after the meeting, also pointed in that direction. Although they mentioned no drastic weakening from a few months back, the general perception of respondents was that the economy was stagnant and growth would remain low throughout the year. 
As for the implications of these data for the possibility of recovering growth towards the end of the year, it was thought that information was insuf cient to make any signi cant change in the vision presented in the December Report, where the growth forecast had already been revised downward. On the one hand, beyond uncertainties about policy changes in the United States and other risks identi ed in the Report, a positive impulse was expected from abroad, with rising commodity prices, improved nancial conditions and activity consolidating in the developed world. Locally, nancial conditions were recovering after the post-US-election tightening, as re ected in the evolution of long-term rates (not very in uenced by monetary policy). On the other hand, consumption had been somewhat stronger, re ecting that the labor market had found a smooth way to adjust, as unemployment stood at 6.2% and real wages were growing at near historical averages. 
In ation had also been unexpectedly low, with the difference with the December forecast being linked to both non-core elements and some more exchange- rate-sensitive goods. A look into recent data tended to con rm that the decline in in ation of recent months was strongly associated with the behavior of the exchange rate and, to a lesser extent, with the presence of output gaps. 
However, it was important to note that the medium-term in ation outlook depended substantially on the assumption that activity would recover, since no big changes in the real exchange rate were expected at that horizon. The convergence of in ation to 3% rested on the fact that output gaps, which were now considered bounded, were not foreseen to expand signi cantly going forward and, in fact, were beginning to close in the policy horizon. In this sense, 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
the importance of activity in the in ation forecast was reaf rmed, even if it had not been the main determinant of in ation in the past few years. 
Over the short term, the exchange rate would continue to weigh signi cantly. Therefore, whatever the Federal Reserve did or failed to do was a very important factor in the short-term evolution of in ation. However, as had been mentioned before, the in ation targeting policy framework allowed to absorb the effects of exchange rate uctuations without overreacting to them. What truly mattered was the impact on the medium-term in ation outlook, which depended on a number of elements, including the degree of persistence of the shocks, the state of the business cycle and the context in which the US interest rates would rise. 
The market’s vision was similar to the Bank’s projections, both for 12- and 24-month in ation and for this year’s GDP growth. However, the implicit MPR trajectory had tended to stand a little below the Report’s working assumption, perhaps because the market was expecting a slow recovery towards 2018. 
In this context, the Research Division estimated that the need to reduce the MPR by 50bp had been con rmed and that, given the risks and the behavior of in ation and activity, it would be advisable to act sooner than previously thought. At the same time, the information at hand did not point to the need to enlarge the interest rate cut estimated in the Report’s baseline scenario. This would be consistent with a scenario of more persistent weakness which, as mentioned, was not part of the baseline scenario. 
In this context, the natural options were to either reduce the MPR by 25bp and keep the expansionary bias, or reduce it by 50bp but with a neutral bias. From the point of view of the forecast models, cutting 50bp in one move or in a very short time made no big difference. Thus, this time around, after weighing the pros and cons of the two options it seemed that the most important thing was to emphasize the communicational aspects. The 50bp cut had the disadvantage of taking the market by surprise, with the risk of being misconstrued as a more fundamental change in the Bank’s vision with respect to the baseline scenario of the last Report. This could give rise to an interpretation that greater than 50bp cuts were in the horizon, a position that did not have the consensus of the Board. The obvious advantage of this option was that if the scenario of slower economic recovery came true, the Bank would be in a better position to provide a stronger impulse. 
Conversely, the option of lowering the MPR by 25bp had the advantage of being in synchrony with the market, minimizing the communicational problems. Meanwhile, it provided a little more exibility to monetary policy making, as 
it left open the possibility of a second cut, which was always good considering the volatility of the data and the dif culties in interpreting them. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
On the external front, several Board members agreed that the scenario was somewhat more favorable than some months ago, but signi cant risks remained. Among several elements, they noted that economic activity in the developed world was improving and that concerns about de ation were dissipating, while incipient voices of alert about price rises were being heard. In addition, the US had initiated a process, possibly slow, of raising interest rates in an environment of increasing normality. China had not worsened and the prices of key commodities, such as oil and copper, had remained above those of last year. They also noted that important risks remained, including the interest rate trajectory in the US and the potential effects on the world economy of the possible protectionist measures announced by the new Administration. One Board member remarked that the Federal Reserve had given a more explicit signal on rate increases in the coming years which, in combination with the expectations of a new government’s scal actions, had pushed long rates up signi cantly, while strengthening the dollar at the same time. He added that it was interesting to note that although some of the effects had been reversed or toned down in recent weeks, the notion that the US economy was recovering had intensi ed. 
On the evolution of the local scenario, all the Board members noted the downward surprises in activity and in ation. One of them pointed out that, in any case, he observed a rather mixed scenario. On the negative side, there had been two consecutive months of negative surprises in the Imacec, re ecting, inter alia, the poor performance of the mining sector and the adjustment of housing construction, after exhausting the transient impulse associated with the announced upcoming VAT increase on the sale of new homes. There was also negative news from the services side, but it was more dif cult to distinguish whether developments were persistent or transitory. A positive note was the slightly greater than anticipated increase in private consumption, supported by improvements in labor income and some partial recovery of consumer expectations, as well as favorable conditions of access to credit. The unemployment rate remained low, although partly contained by an increase in self-employment jobs. 
One Board member noted that domestic data contrasted with an external environment that could be seen as improving. In addition, incoming activity indicators that excluded mining were outstanding, because they came after three quarters that, in an overall scenario of weakness and pessimism, showed 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
somewhat more auspicious gures, which he believed was a major contrast. Moreover, it was particularly remarkable to see how the poor investment gures, where at the margin the deterioration of construction stood out, could co-exist with still strong consumer indicators, grounded on disposable income that was growing signi cantly, still relaxed nancial conditions and a marginal improvement in con dence indicators. 
One Board member noted that incoming data had tended to con rm the scenario assumed in the Monetary Policy Report, which considered the need for a more expansionary monetary policy. He also noted that although the available data tended to con rm the expectation of a rebound in the country’s economic growth in the second half of 2017, this trajectory, which would explain the convergence of in ation to the target in 2018, was still uncertain. 
One Board member said that he agreed with the view that, beyond some particular data, the main determinant of the drop in in ation had been the evolution of the exchange rate. However, it could not be ignored that the effects of persistent economic weakening could also be affecting the degree of exchange rate pass-through. He also emphasized that in ation forecasts both 12 and 24 months ahead, not only the Bank’s but also under the different market measures, had remained very stable, pointing to an in ation just under 3% by the end of this year and at 3% by the end of 2018. This Board member also noted that since the US elections, Chilean long rate movements had been fully undone, while the peso had appreciated again signi cantly. The overall somewhat more optimistic tone in the markets had probably played a part, together with the idea that the major developed economies, to which China needed to be added, were now in better shape than was foreseen until a few months ago. 
Regarding the monetary policy decision, all the Board members present agreed that the Report’s scenario, which considered a monetary easing, remained valid. One Board member said that the latest news suggested that it was appropriate to expedite this adjustment and therefore the options of reducing the MPR by 25 or 50bp were the right ones. To decide between the two options, there were two central aspects to consider. One had to do with incoming activity, prices and nancial market indicators. The background was consistent with a scenario where disin ationary pressures were expected to be even more intense in the short term than had been estimated in the Report. The second aspect was the constellation of background indicators of the pace of economic growth towards 2018, the evolution of the labor market, the performance of consumption and, of course, also the international scenario and the interpretation of its developments. All these antecedents were particularly uncertain and remained ambiguous in terms of both their persistence and their effects on medium-term 
in ationary pressures. Faced with these considerations, he believed that what should weigh the most were the more certain elements of the conjuncture, pointing in a rather unequivocal direction to the importance of lowering the MPR by at least 50bp. In his view, the main obstacle to a 50bp reduction in one strike was not that it was not expected by the market, but that, because of the way monetary policy was done, it would require a signal on what would come next. Personally, he believed that a greater easing was necessary than the one contemplated in the Report, perhaps similar to the market’s view. However, he believed that it was still too early to pool the criteria on the matter and give a collegial view on the conduct of monetary policy in that scenario. Therefore, he was inclined to reducing the MPR by 25bp, to 3.25%, maintaining the bias of the Communication. This would allow the Board to maintain all the necessary exibility to continue to increase the monetary stimulus in the coming months, at a pace and magnitude concurrent with the medium-term in ation outlook. 
One Board member indicated that, in his view, the options proposed were not appropriate, in particular because of the risks involved in a 50bp MPR cut. He noted that the discussion on the cyclical position of the economy tended to strongly emphasize the changes in the margin. For example, how much should the MPR change to prevent a particular movement in the gap or the exchange rate from deviating in ation from the target. He thought that was ne, but it was also necessary to consider the levels of the variables. A 50bp drop was not the same when the MPR was at a neutral level —say 5%— than when it was clearly expansionary and very near the in ation target. The effectiveness was different and the risks different. Furthermore, the levels of the gap —assuming that it could be accurately measured in real time—, of indebtedness, in ation, etc. should also be taken into account. Thus, he believed that the option of a 50bp cut would be perfectly reasonable if the MPR were close to its neutral level, in ation below the tolerance range, and the unemployment rate signi cantly above its historical averages. However, none of that was the case. Moreover, since the beginning of the last decade, the MPR had been substantially below the in ation target only in periods that could be labeled extraordinary, either because of the persistence of unemployment rates above 10% or in the 2009 recession. Of course, he said, it could be argued that it was preferable to go ahead and act preventively, but that required a careful examination of risks. Among them, it was necessary to have a reasonable degree of assurance that the economy was headed for further deterioration; On the other hand, the external environment had to be taken into account as well, both because of the possible impulse or brake that might come from abroad, and because of exchange rate and in ationary effects of moving with or against the trends of external rates. Meanwhile, there were other important risks that needed to be brought up. One of them was related to nancial stability and the possibility that, due to 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
concerns about the debt levels of some agents, a more aggressive lowering of the MPR would lead to increased borrowing in the short term. Another risk was market reactions. With the current interest rate levels, the additional boost of rate cuts would be relatively low. Faced with this, it was possible for pressures to arise to increase the dose of the stimulus, so the aforementioned risks would be exacerbated. Accordingly, he believed that the conditions for a major cut to the rate were not present, and the risks of moving in that direction clearly outweighed the bene ts. In his view, to pull the economy out of its low-growth trajectory would require a massive push for investment, and the main bulk of it could only come from the private sector. A necessary condition for this impulse were favorable nancing standards, but this was not the main restriction at the moment, when the cost of and access to internal and external credit were very positive, both in absolute terms and from a nancial history perspective. Thus, for him, the relevant options were to either keep the MPR at 3.5%, mainly because of the advantages of waiting for new antecedents that could prove that the deceleration of output and in ation was more persistent, or lower it by 25bp, acting in a preventive way, within the limited margins of maneuver that the current situation allowed. Indicators supporting one or the other option were quite balanced. However, since the Report signaled interest rate reductions in the event of further deceleration, and the market almost unanimously anticipated that this would occur this time, he believed that the costs of waiting for new information would outweigh the bene ts of receiving it, so he voted for reducing the MPR by 25bp, to 3.25%. 
One Board member noted that the gures con rmed a picture of persistent domestic weakness and lower in ationary pressures, making room for monetary policy to be eased somewhat. Background data suggested that the short-term outlook had moved downwards and, in his opinion, justi ed anticipating the MPR trajectory with respect to the latest Report’s working assumption. However, he also believed that said background did not suf ce to deviate signi cantly from the Report’s scenario that considered a gradual recovery of the economy towards the end of this year and the turn of the next, which in turn fundamentally determined the in ationary dynamics and was the main driver of the monetary policy trajectory. In this context, the option of a 50bp cut while deleting the bias was complex for the market to interpret, not only because it could lead to a very negative evaluation of the medium-term outlook, which was out of the question, but also because it could give a vision of monetary policy delay — which was not justi ed given the state of Chile’s economic cycle—, or could suggest a certainty about future prospects, which was absent in the current context. He then was for a cut of 25bp, keeping open the option of further monetary easing, whose timing would depend primarily on the medium-term in ationary outlook. 
One Board member mentioned that the movement in the same direction of activity and prices, coupled with the fast in ationary deceleration, especially by year’s end, explained the risk of a prolonged reduction in in ation that could compromise the achievement of the target, justifying the need for further monetary policy easing. This was reinforced by a more in-depth examination of the outlook for 2017. The current output gap would expand in the coming months, possibly increasing its in uence on in ation’s behavior. Thus, although data was insuf cient to depart signi cantly from the Report’s baseline scenario, it did suf ce to justify a faster reduction of the MPR faster than assumed under the Report’s working assumption. For these reasons, he voted for reducing the MPR by 25bp, maintaining the expansionarybiasofmonetarypolicy,andraisingthelikelihoodthatthesecondcut would also be anticipated with respect to the assumption in the December Report, to ensure the achievement of the target. Of course, this additional adjustment of the MPR remained, for the time being, a working assumption, and subject to new information coming in, particularly if it could affect the trajectory of in ation in future months. Finally, this Board member shared a couple of re ections on the evolution of expectations. The rst was the relationship between monetary policy decisions and market expectations. In this regard, contrary to what some had argued, a closer look to events after the September Report revealed that the Central Bank adjusted its in ation projections before the market, as it began to input a possible MPR reduction shortly after the rst negative surprise of in ation and, when faced with evidence of slower activity and in ation, accelerated its decisions, including the one made at this meeting. Thus, the Bank had been able to react in a timely fashion to the new evidence, and guide the market with its decisions and signals. This con rmed the Board’s conviction that guiding and preparing the market was usually preferable to surprising or confusing it. The second was related to another argument that was often heard, claiming that changes in monetary policy did not have much justi cation when domestic demand was constrained by negative investor expectations. In this regard, it was important to emphasize that monetary policy had to respond to potential in ation divergence with the target, even if from a different origin, and that the transmission channels, which linked the MPR to the behavior of in ation were diverse and related not only to investment. For this reason, negative business expectations depressing investment could not be an argument for monetary policy not to act when there was the risk of deviating from the target. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Claro and Board members Vial and García, to lower the monetary policy rate by 25 basis points to 3.25%. 
