MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 224, held on 14 July 2015. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Enrique Marshall, Vice-Governor; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board Member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Rodrigo Valdés. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Gabriel Aparici, acting Financial Policies Division Director; Gloria Peña, Macroeconomic Statistics Manager; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Elías Albagli, Economic Analysis and Modeling Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
Incoming data since the last Meeting had signi cantly altered the projections for output and in ation. It was now foreseen that in ation would take longer to converge to the center of the target range, while output was expected to be less dynamic, at least during this year. Despite these changes, the Research Division judged that the policy options were unchanged, so the only relevant option was to keep the policy rate at 3%. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
As for Chile’s economic activity, the month’s data showed lower than expected investment, a phenomenon that had adversely affected production, bringing down growth to 0.8% in May. Business and household expectations had not recovered, as had been assumed in the June Monetary Policy Report’s baseline scenario, and had even shown some setbacks in several indicators. This coincided with the markedly more negative view of the companies interviewed for the Business Perceptions Report (BPR) of the second quarter. The labor market continued to show some resilience, but rising unemployment and slower growth in wages were consistent with the weaker economic outlook. Private consumption continued to grow below labor income, which, given the favorable conditions in the credit market, was a sign of a more cautious consumer behavior in line with the worsened prospects for the future evolution of the economy and, in particular, possible adjustments in the labor market. 
Doubts about the local sources of growth were compounded by a resurgence of external risks. The situation in China was particularly important, as distress in some of its nancial markets had intensi ed concerns about its capacity to grow. Overall, during the month, the outlook for global activity had not greatly changed, in contrast to Chile, where analysts had again cut the expected growth for this year and were also forecasting a slower recovery for 2016 and 2017. Commodity prices had suffered, adding an extra layer of uncertainty about commodity exporting countries. 
In this context, Chile's monetary policy continued to contribute to the smoothing of the cycle, helping to ease the credit conditions of businesses and households. Financial conditions were among the easiest in many years, with interest rates well below their historical averages and attractive credit supply conditions for most agents, as shown by different surveys and information gathered for the BPR. This situation also suggested that the impact of further rate cuts on output would be limited. 
In ation continued to be the main concern of the Research Division, especially its high persistence. The adjustment of the economy had required a depreciation of the peso in both real and nominal terms, pushing in ation up. However, the size and persistence of the nominal depreciation had not been foreseen by the Division during the last year, becoming the main reason behind the string of upward revisions to in ation projections and to the timing of its convergence. This month had been no exception and the nominal exchange rate had risen more than 3% from the previous meeting. 
Thus, the exchange rate’s pass-through would continue to be the main driver of in ation in the coming months, again pushing back the moment that it would 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
converge to 3%. In any case, this was still the forecast baseline scenario, because the in ationary effects of exchange rate movements are temporary and evidently the economy continued to accumulate excess capacity. The main risks for the next six months were also associated with the evolution of the peso, as there were several scenarios that, at least for a while, could trigger a new depreciation. There was also the risk of a faster convergence to these terms associated with the economy’s slowdown, but the analysis pointed at a signi cantly lower incidence than the upside risks associated with the behavior of the exchange rate. 
As had been mentioned before, high in ation posed by itself a risk for the anchoring of expectations, especially because the risk scenarios where abrupt exchange rate movements could generate in ation increases in the short term were very likely (e.g., the normalization of monetary policy in the United States). 
Thus, the option to lower the rate was easily dismissed, given the risks of starting a cycle of cuts in such a context. Meanwhile, as aforesaid, in a scenario where business and household funding conditions were relatively loose, the monetary policy looked properly expansionary, while the foreseen economic effects of loosening further were moderate. 
Nor did the option of raising the MPR seem relevant, because, although the risk of de-anchoring did not disappear in a scenario where the market largely shared the view that current in ation was associated to the exchange rate, and where on the real side there were no in ationary pressures on the horizon, the risk was bounded, especially in a context where output projections had been systematically revised downward. The fact that in ation expected 12 months ahead had uctuated considerably in recent months, but not for 24 months ahead, re ected this situation. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
About the world economy, all the Board members commented the risks coming from the situation of Greece and China, coupled with the approaching of the normalization of the monetary policy interest rate in the United States. These events had been behind many of the recent movements in asset prices and, in the opinion of one Board member, required keeping a watchful eye for the possibility of more extreme adverse scenarios that would have adverse effects on growth and in ation in Chile. Some Board members added that the situation in Latin America was particularly complex, with constant downward revisions to the growth forecast in most of the economies in the region. One Board member noted that with a somewhat higher risk perception, markets had reacted the 
way everyone knew: a strengthened dollar, lower interest rates, and a fall in the more sensitive commodity prices to nancial developments, including copper and oil. Not the best picture for emerging economies. 
In the opinion of one Board member, the agreement for a new rescue plan for Greece was certainly a relief and, although it did not entirely eliminate, it did reduce a factor of global nancial volatility. But there was still a long and complex road ahead to walk. Along the same line, the agreement achieved by Iran and the big powers to eliminate sanctions and reduce the risk of nuclear proliferation should also have global effects and bring down spreads in the oil market, with a positive effect in Chile. However, he continued, not all was good. There was increased concern for China’s economic performance, intensi ed by the partial correction to stock prices, and quite extreme reactions by policy makers to contain it. In addition, he was worried about the slowdown in other Asian economies and its impact on commodity prices, especially copper. He concluded by pointing out that his impression was that the most recent evidence suggested that prospects for copper had worsened since the last Monetary Policy Report. 
One Board member stressed that the way events had unfolded in Greece re ected how costly adjusting its economy had been and the dif culties facing the Eurozone to deal with and negotiate extraordinary rescue packages. In his view, the evidence showed that the problem was basically circumscribed to Greece and the effects on the rest of the European Community and especially on the rest of the world should be bounded. He thought, however, that this issue would come back to the table some time ahead, so the working assumption that the Greek situation would have only limited effects should be analyzed and evaluated on a permanent basis. 
One Board member noted that news coming from China revealed several interesting matters. The aggressive reaction of the Chinese authorities to try to contain the fall in stock prices raised doubts about its capacity and will to favor market-based mechanisms for resource allocation. It also raised concerns about the process of nancial reforms in the country, compounded with the genuine doubts about the true depth of its economic slowdown. Also noteworthy had been the copper price swings that, in his opinion, were in some way related with the changes in Chinese nancial conditions, and were proof of the sensitivity, at least in the short run, of the copper price to these expectations. 
Turning to the Chilean economy, all the Board members noted the negative surprise of the month’s output gures, which could result in yearly gures below those assumed in the Monetary Policy Report. However, one Board member said that, although it was quite clear that second-quarter growth would fall below 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
expectations affecting annual growth, it was prudent to wait for more recent data. Waiting was prudent, because there were transitory factors that had affected foreign trade gures in the past few months, which could be magnifying the size of its adjustment over the short run. One Board member noted that, as had been feared the month before, the second quarter of 2015 showed a signi cant deceleration and had been materially worse than forecast in the Report. The underlying reasons behind this were not easy to unravel, but it was possible to attribute it to the deterioration of foreign trade, the sustained pessimism of households and businesses, and also an external environment that did not help improve expectations. The possibility of resuming higher growth by the second half, leading, for example, to a scenario similar to the growth expected in the Report, depended on these elements ceasing to weigh in the expansion of output and expenditure. 
One Board member added that domestic nancial conditions were still quite expansionary and aligned with the cycle, suggesting that the weakness of demand and output obeyed to phenomena unrelated to nancial conditions. Other Board member noted that the marked weakness of output and demand was mirrored by slowly evolving bank credit, with the sole exceptions of real estate nancing and housing loans, consistently with the trends observed in the construction sector. 
One Board member said that indicators for con dence and expectations of households and companies, aside from minor movements, maintained a trace of pessimism, which was also present in the interviews that made up the BPR. He went on to say that the vision of prudence and realism in the conduct of public affairs recently emanated from the Ministry of Finance should be appreciated, particularly in the sense that it helped to set solid foundations for the recovery of these indicators. 
Some Board members drew attention to the rather weak performance of exports, especially considering the magnitude of the devaluation. In the opinion of one Board member, there were probably several factors behind this, such as the low sensitivity of the Chilean exports basket to the exchange rate and the weakness of Latin America, a key market in certain manufacturing lines, and the fact that the devaluation had occurred in conjunction with a worldwide strengthening of the dollar and falling prices of several export lines. 
Several Board members reviewed the evolution of the labor market and the slowdown of nominal wages in recent months. In the opinion of one Board member, the labor market appeared to be gradually moving towards 
normalization, with growth in nominal wages approaching its historical averages, employment growth consistent with a moderate expansion of activity, and labor participation rates returning to levels consistent with previous patterns. One Board member considered that the signi cant slowdown of nominal wages tended to con rm that the substantial growth of previous quarters was due to the indexation effects of the in ationary shock, not to a tighter labor market. The same dynamics of employment showed that, overall, unemployment had reacted to the weaker tone of the economy, and although there had been uctuations in the workforce, they had been transitory. 
One Board member, while commenting on the slowdown in nominal wages to levels more consistent with the current state of the economic cycle, stressed that, in any case, these were still growing above their historical patterns. He also noted that the recent evolution of wages was mainly attributed to widespread indexation and, therefore, if in ation rose, as it had most recently, wages could rise again. There was even a risk, he said, that a vicious circle took shape with higher in ation and, in turn, with higher wages for a time longer than then estimated. 
All ve Board members expressed their concern about in ation, stressing that it had been above forecasts and again surpassed the tolerance range. As had been mentioned earlier, the in ation trend responded mainly to the depreciation of the peso, so going forward the evolution of the exchange rate would remain a key factor in the behavior of prices. Several Board members added that this led to foresee that in ation would stay in the upper end of the tolerance range for several more months, converging more slowly than previously estimated. One Board member emphasized the importance of further reviewing the short-term sensitivity of in ation to the exchange rate pass-through, because he had the impression that it was now higher than a few years ago. However, one Board member argued that the weak economy —growing below potential— suggested that in ationary pressures should begin to ease, albeit slowly and, somehow, subject to the ups and downs of the exchange rate. 
One Board member emphasized that the prospect of in ation remaining in the upper part of the tolerance range for several months was no minor thing to the Central Bank. While it was true that weak output and the natural limits to the currency depreciation should lead in ation to converge to 3% within the projection horizon, it was also true that this convergence had been delayed time and again and in ation had proved far more persistent than expected. The risk of spending too much time in this situation amounted to facing an in ation de-anchoring that obviously could not be permitted by the Central Bank. 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
As for the policy decision, all ve Board members agreed that the only plausible option was to hold the policy rate at 3%. 
According to one Board member, recent indicators posed, for the purposes of discussing the medium-term projections of the next Monetary Policy Report, the challenge of properly assessing the macroeconomic adjustment in Chile. In particular, the consistency of the exchange rate evolution with the stage of the cycle. This, on the one hand, because the evolution of the exchange rate is a factor that helps the tradable sectors to cope with a weaker world economy, but, on the other, it also was having in ationary effects. Additionally, it was necessary to analyze more carefully how the level of the real exchange rate matched the observed developments of the current account. He continued by noting that, for now, private expectations continued to consider that in ation had an eminently transitory component, and that the bulk of conjunctural data led to expect a delay in the process of monetary policy normalization during 2016. From the forward curve it could be inferred, unlike what it showed some time ago, that the rst policy rate hike would take place rather towards the middle of 2016. This scenario was distant enough in time so as not to warrant including it in the present communication of monetary policy. He nished his argument by pointing out that he tended to share the diagnosis about interest rates and in ation that shaped private expectations. 
One Board member had the opinion that accumulated data yielded as the only reasonable choice to leave the policy rate at 3% and keep the neutral bias going forward. In the near future, the most likely scenario would include a gradual recovery of growth, which might call for monetary policy to remain as expansionary as today for several quarters. Such possibility was conditional on in ation returning to 3% within reasonable time. Otherwise, it would be necessary to tighten monetary policy; else the market would need to adjust via a rise in longer-term rates. Therefore, he believed that the feasibility of maintaining an expansionary monetary policy, and its effectiveness going forward, required showing a straightforward commitment with in ation. 
One Board member noted that the option that again emerged clearly was to keep the MPR at, as it was actually dif cult to provide support to any other policy option. The advisable way to go was to reaf rm the general stance of monetary policy, which, moreover, was expected by the market. He estimated that it could surprise agents that, for several months, the Board had considered no other option than holding the rate, which was unusual. However, in these circumstances, the room for monetary policy making looked extremely tight, so the Bank had to be very careful with the signals it delivered. 
One Board member justi ed his vote by stating that monetary policy had been highly expansionary for a long period of time already. Financing costs for companies and households remained low, in many cases at or near record lows. Meanwhile, long-term rates were also low by historical standards. Two years ago, as a result of the anticipated weakness in output and demand, the Central Bank had provided signi cant monetary stimulus, which had been maintained since then, even though in ation had already stayed more than a year above the upper limit of the tolerance range. Of course, this relied on the premise that it was a temporary phenomenon and in ation would return to the target in the near future. In fact, in ation expectations in the policy horizon remained anchored at 3%. However, the persistence of in ation and the risks associated with it left no room for further monetary stimulus in the current conditions. Therefore, the option of lowering the MPR could be quickly ruled out as inadmissible. The option of raising it, on the other hand, was inconsistent with a weakening economy. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marshall, and Board members Claro, Vial, and García, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3%. 
