MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary Policy Meeting No. 248, held on 13 July 2017. 
Present: Mario Marcel, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member; Rosanna Costa, Board member. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Pablo Mattar, acting General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Solange Berstein, Financial Operations Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Tatiana Vargas, acting Strategy and Communications of Monetary Policy Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; María Francisca Pérez, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Carlos Medel, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background minutes and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
Since the last meeting, the main news had been local, where the low in ation of June stood out and so did —to a lesser extent— May activity. Beyond the surprise, from a monetary policy perspective, it was important to gauge the impact that this data could have in the medium-term in ation outlook and its risk balance. In this regard, the evaluation was that, even considering the short-term deviations, there were not enough elements to infer a signi cant deviation from the medium-term in ation scenario depicted in June’s Monetary Policy Report. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
About in ation, the deviation from estimates in the latest Report was associated mainly with items typically more volatile than core ones and that tended to be more determined by supply-side shocks. In particular, the successive negative surprises in the “fruits and vegetables” sector and the lower price of the “energy” component, were largely behind the lower in ation observed since the statistical closure of the June Report. Beyond its impact on the evolution of annual in ation during the coming months, this type of surprises did not alter the medium-term in ation forecast. Core in ation dynamics, on the other hand, had been very similar to the June forecast which, moreover, had not differed from expectations since the December 2016 Report. Thus, recent in ation indicators did not allow to infer a systematic deviation from the predicted trajectory for this variable. 
Regarding in ation’s medium-term fundamentals, in a context where the real exchange rate was expected to remain fairly stable, the evolution of in ation was importantly anchored to activity gaps. The baseline scenario predicted that during the next two years the capacity gaps would close gradually and partially, a view that was not materially altered by the somewhat weaker second-quarter’s Other GDP, since most of the correction obeyed to speci c factors (such as the larger calendar effect in April), which should not affect the evolution of activity in the remainder of the year. The rest of the indicators —including the main components of demand, the labor market and foreign trade— had evolved in line with expectations. More cyclical indicators, such as consumer expectations and electricity generation, were consistent with the foreseen scenario of gradual recovery. 
The market’s view seemed generally to point in the same direction. Although after the release of the in ation rate, expectations one year out had fallen, expectations at two years had not changed from the previous month, re ecting the rather transient nature assigned to the surprise. The Economic Expectations Survey (EES) showed a fall in in ation 12 months ahead from 2.9% to 2.7%, but two years ahead it remained at 3%. For its part, the Financial Brokers Survey (FBS) held on to its projection of the previous survey (2.5% and 2.8% for the same terms, respectively). The exception was breakeven in ation, which showed a more marked fall two years ahead. Although this phenomenon had to be monitored, the evidence showed that this measure tended to be strongly in uenced by different premiums, which made it dif cult to interpret in ation expectations directly. In fact, methods that sought to correct these problems showed that expectations had remained more stable and very much in line with those of the FBS. As for the expected MPR, the EES showed no changes and the FBS showed a limited movement, which appeared somewhat more persistent in the measure derived from nancial prices. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Thus, the scenario outlined in the latest Reports, of low core in ation and very gradual recovery of activity, seemed to remain good. As there were no big deviations from the in ation convergence scenario, the option to keep the MPR at 2.5%, reaf rming the general monetary policy orientation presented in the Report, seemed totally consistent with the month’s data. 
However, the Research Division considered that, given the magnitude of the in ationary surprise, its low level and the still weak activity context, it was advisable to evaluate the desirability of making the monetary policy instance more expansionary. The two main arguments in favor of a change in that direction were these: First, even though the Research Division was of the opinion that there were no strong enough arguments to alter the baseline scenario, overall antecedents could indicate a greater probability of alternative scenarios where the convergence of in ation called for a greater monetary impulse, for example, due to a further weakening of activity. Because in a context of low in ation and important capacity gaps the cost of a deviation in this direction clearly outweighed the cost of one in the opposite direction, a preventive increase in the monetary impulse could be justi ed from a risk management standpoint. This argument, which had been used in the past, was certainly important, but it was not evident from the analysis that the medium-term risk balance was very different from the one of a few months back, beyond the fact that the probability of the annual in ation rate being below target over the next few months had increased. 
A second argument was the evolution of in ation expectations. In particular, the convergence of in ation assumed not only that capacity gaps would gradually close during the policy horizon and the real exchange rate would remain fairly stable, but also that medium-term in ation expectations would remain well anchored at 3%. Thus, it was right to wonder whether recent in ation movements posed a risk in this matter, especially because the probability of having low annual in ation rates during the next 12 months had increased. According to the Research Division, that was not the case for a number of reasons: rst, the surveys showed that the market had internalized the mostly temporary nature of the surprises; second, neither the activity outlook nor its related risks had changed signi cantly; third, unlike events in late 2015, where in ation stayed above the tolerance range for several months, this was the rst month in which it had fallen below the range and projections indicated that it would be returning to it at some point in the coming months. Finally, the Bank had clearly proven its exibility in its policy conduct, so that, should more energetic action be necessary, it had both the capacity and the conviction to do so. 
2. Monetary policy decision3/ 
All ve Board members considered that the external scenario outlined in the June Report was consolidating. Several Board members noted the increase in long- term interest rates in developed countries, probably due to the consolidation of a recovery scenario and the normalization of their monetary policies. 
One Board member noted that the spillover of economic growth across countries and sectors in the developed world had strengthened the vision of self-sustained expansion, which translated into better market expectations and upward adjustments in growth projections. At the same time, he continued, policy risks and nancial turbulence were contained, even in a context in which the end of ultra-expansionary monetary policies in the developed world was coming closer. He also stressed that monetary tightening in China had advanced without a signi cant cost in terms of lost output. 
At the domestic level, all the Board members mentioned the signi cant surprise coming from June’s headline in ation, for which the baseline scenario had already anticipated a low number. In any case, several Board members stated that this surprise was concentrated in volatile elements, since CPIEFE in ation was still in line with projections in the last Report. One Board member pointed out that to the extent that the exchange rate remained stable and activity followed the expected pattern, gradually responding to trading partners’ higher growth and the monetary impulse injected in previous months, the scenario continued to feature in ation converging to the target over the two-year horizon. 
One Board member was of the opinion that while in ationary surprises were concentrated on the more volatile items, should they persist for a long time, second-round effects would impact in ation. This was an issue that he believed should be monitored in the coming months rather than being a matter of concern for this meeting. In his view, the key point was that, be yond the breakdown of in ation into its different components, the outlook was consistent with gures for non-mining activity and employment that were similar to those anticipated and which suggested that the disin ationary effects of the gaps matched the forecasts. 
3/ In order to preserve the regulatory individual anonymity in the discussion, all ve Board members are herein referred to as males, including female member Ms. Rosanna Costa. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member said that, while there appeared to be no evidence pointing to a macro scenario for in ation signi cantly different from estimates in the last Report, the magnitude of the June in ationary surprise should not be minimized, and its meaning and projection over time had to be assessed. In particular, barring a widening of capacity gaps, it was right to wonder whether the second-round effects of headline in ation below the Report’s projection could prolong its impact and in uence core in ation. 
Several Board members commented that domestic activity was evolving in line with forecasts. They drew attention to imports growth gures, particularly for capital goods, which underpinned the recovery of GDP projected in the Report. Some Board members noted that the May Imacec had con rmed the transitory adverse effects of fewer business days in April 2017 compared with 2016. 
One Board member stressed that labor market and import data were positive for the prospects of consumption and investment behavior. The greater dynamism of salaried employment and real wages, coupled with a reduction in pessimism among consumers, allowed not only to explain the recent growth of durables and non-durable goods and services consumption, but also to reduce the risks of a deterioration of this component of domestic demand in the immediate future. The evolution of imports of capital goods rati ed the view of a more dynamic behavior of investment in non-mining machinery and equipment with respect to the other components of gross xed capital formation. This did not mean that the fall in mining growth could be overlooked. It was important not to overestimate the economy’s velocity of recovery. He recalled that the growth projections of the last Report leaned on a very moderate monthly expansion rate, which translated into more signi cant annual variations when considering the low bases of comparison. Even so, this trajectory was enough to halt the widening of the activity gap by the end of 2017 and begin to decline by mid-2018. 
One Board member pointed out that the information did not seem conclusive as to whether the scenario depicted in the Report was still valid, since the behavior of the durable components of expenditure was likely to respond to stock replenishment or a very necessary renewal, and, in fact, projections of Other GDP for the second quarter of the year had been revised downwards. 
Turning to the policy decision, several Board members agreed that developments of the last month did not suf ce to modify the monetary policy scenario proposed in June and thus the logical decision was to keep the MPR at 2.5%. 
One Board member argued that keeping the MPR unchanged was the right thing to do, since what had been observed in in ation was a shock on volatile 
prices whose effects should vanish during the policy horizon and the in ation trend towards the target in the policy horizon should not be altered. Activity and demand indicators, at least for the time being, were consistent with that assessment. 
One Board member thought it important to recall that because of the natural lags of monetary policy, the effects of the interest rate reductions should begin to become apparent in the second half of the year and into early 2018. Thus, he thought that the best thing to do at this meeting was to hold the MPR at 2.5% and keep a neutral bias. He added that core in ation was still aligned with projections, which took the drama off the June gure, because a one-time surprise was no basis to infer a change in the in ation trajectory. He added that the incipient improvement in salaried employment indicators, together with a slight acceleration in annual change in nominal wages, made it dif cult for the negative monthly variation of the CPI to produce second-round effects. He ended by noting that in several opportunities the Board had ruled out a reaction of monetary policy to a one-time indicator, stating that it should do so only when facing a change in the medium-term scenario, and that was not the case as of now. 
One Board member was of the opinion that June’s in ation was a relevant data for the risk assessment for the trajectory of in ation. However, the evidence available at the moment did not point to a signi cant deviation from the medium-term scenario outlined in the Report. He believed that the most reasonable decision was to hold the rate at 2.5%, maintaining the neutral bias, and judiciously evaluate in incoming indicators both their implications on the baseline scenario and on the creation of risks threatening the medium-term in ation outlook. 
One Board member noted that while the risk balance for activity remained unbiased, there was a downward risk in in ation. If materialized, it would not necessarily be a change in the macro scenario, but a deviation in the in ation trajectory persistent enough to require a technical adjustment in monetary policy. For example, it was important to assess whether the persistence of in ation below the nominal MPR for several months could have a material impact on market nancial conditions, which would affect the process of growth recovery. Nonetheless, the risk weight of a signi cant change in the in ation trajectory called for deeper analysis, ideally backed by new data, which would make it possible to distinguish the factors that could in uence in ation projections in the policy horizon more clearly, as well as the magnitude of such impact. In this respect, it was important to stress the importance of monetary policy decisions not only being well justi ed, but also providing the market with suf cient elements to interpret and understand their meaning. For this reason, he voted 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
for keeping the MPR at 2.5%, pending new background information to assess the likelihood of a signi cant deviation of the in ation trajectory. 
One Board member considered that the combination of news justi ed a moderate increase in the monetary stimulus, so he voted for cutting the policy rate by 25 bp. In his opinion, the data known since the June Report triggered a downward revision to the in ation forecast one year ahead, which would have implications on the dynamics of core in ation and also on wages, because of widespread indexation. Financial conditions had tightened, as evidenced by the increase in UF-indexed interest rates at one and two years, plus the increase in interest rates at longer maturities and changes in the Bank Credit Survey. In addition, several measures of in ation expectations were below 3% and close to or below their lows of several years. This, despite the fact that the MPR trajectory was, to a greater or lesser degree, below that of the previous month and with an in ationary surprise that was considered a one-time event. Regarding a cost- bene t analysis, he thought that the costs of cutting the MPR by 25bp were hard to distinguish considering the aforementioned developments. The fact that the surveys did not anticipate an adjustment to the MPR at this meeting should not be an impediment, as monetary policy should act on a timely and exible manner. On the other hand, the main risk of keeping the MPR unchanged was the dif culty of holding on to the same policy diagnosis of the June Report, when developments were increasing the risks of a relevant delay in the in ation convergence to the target. 
About the press release, several Board members thought it appropriate to keep the neutral bias. One Board member said, however, that changing this bias was not a necessary condition to adjust the policy rate further down the line. One Board member thought that a similar message as last month would suggest that in ation would converge to the target no matter what policy actions were taken, something he considered false. Thus, in this opinion communication should state that the Bank was aware of the fact that the risk of a postponement of in ation convergence to 3% had increased and that monetary policy would react accordingly, either by reducing the MPR by 25bp at this meeting or by including a downward bias in the press release. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Claro and Board members Vial and Costa, to keep the monetary policy rate at 2.5%. Board member García voted for lowering the MPR to 2.25%. 
