MINUTES OF THE 
MONETARY POLICY MEETING The monetary policy session N°188 was held on 12 July 2012. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board Member; Sebastián Claro, Board Member; Joaquín Vial, Board Member. 
Present the Minister of Finance, Felipe Larraín. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Kevin Cowan, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Market Manager; Luis Opazo, Financial Stability Manager; Enrique Orellana, Monetary Policy Strategy and Communication Manager; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General; Jaime Troncoso, internal journalist. 
1. Background 
1.1 Brie ng 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publically available information, can be accessed on the Bank’s web site1/. 
1.2 Background analysis and comments 
There was a discussion on the difference between the evolution of output and demand in Chile—which was stronger than foreseen—and the rest of the world, where gures rather pointed to a weakening. It was noted that there 
1/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
could be several possible explanations, such as, for example, the composition of Chilean exports, the persistently high copper prices and the fact that external nancing conditions had not worsened, as re ected in the conditions of the recent placement of a Codelco bond. It was also noted that it was important to analyze the reasons behind this discrepancy with other emerging economies and whether it could be a lasting or temporary phenomenon. 
2. Options 
On this occasion, with the information gathered since the last meeting, the Research Division proposed as the relevant option to keep the monetary policy interest rate (MPR) at 5.0%. 
June’s Monetary Policy Report assumed an external scenario featuring low growth in developed economies, continuing frictions in external nancial markets and lower terms of trade than in 2011. Incoming information did not modify such scenario materially. A somewhat sharper deceleration of the world economy and its prospects was observed. However, monetary measures and agreements reached in the Eurozone had contributed to slightly improve international nancial conditions, and commodity prices had ceased to fall. 
Domestically, installed capacity and the labor market were still tight, meaning that Chile’s economic growth should align with its potential trajectory. In the year so far, output and demand growth rates were in line with that trend. For the second half of 2012, the projections in the Monetary Policy Report contained an implicit slowdown of growth because of increased international uncertainty and lower external demand. Up to then, the signs of these effects were tenuous. Consumption, investment and hirings showed no signi cant slowdown. A certain deterioration was observed in business expectations, which could result in a reduction in inventory accumulation, but at the same time consumer con dence had improved. 
Annual headline and core in ation were below 3%. The drop in headline in ation had exceeded forecasts, re ecting the behavior of transitory factors, such as non-core components (i.e., energy and foodstuffs), as well as the incidence of the recent appreciation of the peso in tradable goods’ in ation. In the last few weeks, international commodity prices had stopped falling and even a reversal had occurred, especially of grains, which would help moderate these downward pressures. Meanwhile, core in ation indicators—particularly the services component—and nominal wages were stable, validating the diagnosis of a situation of closed gaps, but this was a factor that called for further monitoring. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
With respect to monetary policy, raising the MPR was ruled out considering the deteriorated international outlook and its possible impact on the Chilean economy and in ation. At the same time, the pace of growth of output and employment was converging to its trend rates, core in ation showed a substantial reduction in recent months and the aforementioned behavior of the non-core components had also helped to reduce in ation indicators and market expectations. 
The alternative of lowering the MPR was ruled out this time, considering that output gaps and labor market conditions were still tight, posing a latent risk with respect to the medium-term in ation outlook. It was likely that the effects of the external slowdown on the evolution of the Chilean economy would help avert this risk in the coming months, but these effects had been mild so far. 
As for the option of not changing the MPR, it was warranted in that its current level was within a range of neutral values, while the economy was in a situation of a closed output gap and in ation near the target, which provided time and exibility to wait and collect information on the external developments and their impact on the Chilean economy. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
All the Board members coincided in that, with some exceptions, the evolution of both the global and domestic economy had not deviated signi cantly from projections, so the monetary policy message that had been previously delivered continued to be valid. 
All the Board members stressed that, in general, some progress was observed in the evolution of the nancial situation in the Eurozone, marginally reducing the risk of a traumatic resolution. They noted that the markets’ reaction had been positive but very cautious, because agreements were still partial and posed great challenges in their implementation. One Board member noted that he saw some positive sign, to the extent that policy makers had assumed part of the problems. In his view, however, an evaluation of the capacity of some of these countries to endure the required adjustments to expenditure and changes in real wages was still pending. 
All the Board members agreed that the data of the last month was still showing a deceleration in the U.S. and important emerging economies. One Board member stressed that Chinese authorities have shown more willingness to take action to limit the deceleration. However, he added, no deviation was seen yet 
in that economy’s dynamism that could justify a stronger impulse. Some Board members noted the concern arising from the growth deceleration in emerging economies, as they had so far played a supporting role for global growth. They further noted that these economies were expected to show a rebound in the second half of the year, but if not, the main impulse now sustaining the world economy would be severely affected. Some Board members noted that several economies had continued to pursue more expansionary monetary policies. 
All the Board members also drew attention to the positive effect that measures adopted in the Eurozone had triggered in the prices of assets and commodities. Still, several Board members stressed the increase in the prices of grains, whose behavior needed to be closely monitored because of its direct impact, but also because of its indirect effects, especially on meat prices. One Board member called the attention to the effect of the drop in oil prices in recent months. Aside from the direct and indirect effects on in ation, he underscored the partial recomposition of global imbalances it implied. One Board member added that the recent drop in commodity prices had helped moderate or reduce in ation prospects in the emerging world. 
Domestically, all the Board members noted that, with respect to expectations, the main news had been stronger output growth and lower in ation. One Board member noted that, although short-term in ation seemed lower, wages continued to grow at high rates, also coinciding with a stabilization of growth in GDP and domestic demand at a pace somewhat faster than that of potential GDP. He added that, while an additional slowdown in output was expected in coming months, its occurrence was delayed. One Board member pointed out that the factor underlying the unexpected drop in in ation had been the behavior of its non-core components. This, in his view, was making it dif cult to have a clear reading of demand pressures that could be behind; however, the evolution of some components more related to services and wages was consistent with the hypothesis that the economy was operating near full capacity. One Board member said that the decline in in ation re ected a compensatory reversal of pasts increases. At the same time, he added, the medium-term in ation outlook had not changed materially, as the economy was operating with tight capacity and given the growth prospects assumed in the most likely scenario. At any rate, he concluded, the temporary reduction of in ation was a development that had to be followed closely, especially if it persisted or intensi ed beyond the forecasts of the moment. 
One Board member drew attention to the mixed signals seen in the recent evolution of credit and monetary aggregates. He noted that consumer loans had lost strength, as revealed by the Banking Credit Surveys, and the—in some cases 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
large— increases in these credits’ interest rates, which provided grounds to the expected deceleration in consumption going forward. However, he said, loans to rms were still fairly dynamic, contrasting with the results of the Banking Credit Survey that suggested that some of these conditions had ceased to expand. This contrasted with the evolution of the less liquid monetary aggregates, like M2. This aggregate was still growing at around 20% in nominal, annual terms, an unprecedented gure since the period 2005-2008, which featured three or four years of very signi cant expansion of credit and monetary aggregates. In his opinion, this issue had to be carefully monitored in the near future. Overall, he concluded, the nancial conditions were still normal, although there was some marginal evidence of some tightening. 
One Board member pointed out that domestic demand, output and expectations for these two variables had yet to re ect the effects of a world economy where the slowdown was affecting an ever-increasing number of countries. In his opinion, it was necessary to gure out whether these effects were purely temporary or responded to more structural elements. In principle, he said, he sided with the former. 
As for the monetary policy decision, all the Board members agreed that the only plausible option was to keep the MPR at 5%. One Board member indicated that, together with being within a range of neutral values, the current level of the MPR was consistent with the expected trajectories of output and in ation that con gured the Monetary Policy Report‘s baseline scenario. Thus, for as long as uncertainty persisted about how external and domestic conditions would unfold, it was preferable to choose the option of holding the MPR unchanged. He added that proper weighting of risks also led to choose a at MPR. What could be seen at the moment was that risks were being fairly cancelled out. On one hand, there was the possible worsening of the external scenario; on the other, the persistence of strong domestic demand. In these conditions, it was best to act prudently and avoid policy actions that could require drastic reversals in the short run, with the resulting adverse effects on expectations and market con dence. But this, he noted, by no means closed the possibility of reacting quickly if conditions changed, especially if abruptly. 
One Board member noted that, on one hand, short-term in ation expectations had adjusted heavily downward, so, for the same nominal MPR, the Taylor Principle would imply a marginally tighter monetary policy. This, he said, was one aspect to be assessed. In his opinion, the resolution of this policy dilemma was not obvious at the time. On one hand, all the information shaping the external scenario recommended following other economies and moving toward a more expansionary monetary policy. On the other, for several consecutive 
months already, the awaited deceleration of the domestic economy had taken longer than expected. This, despite lower fuel costs, suggested that medium- term in ationary pressures could be incubating. 
One Board member noted that at this juncture it was important to analyze not only the baseline or most likely scenario, but also fat tail risks, that is, those events that were not in the baseline scenario but were no less likely to occur in extreme scenarios. In this sense, a disorderly resolution of the Eurozone crisis made it necessary to think about how to ensure the best footing to deal with such scenarios. Thus, the prudent thing to do was to keep the MPR constant because it allowed the necessary degrees of freedom to confront a worst-case scenario, considering that the Chilean economy still showed no signs of the slowdown of other economies. He ended stating that only in case of such an extreme scenario it was advisable to move to a more expansionary monetary policy. 
One Board member noted that keeping the MPR was the correct decision with the information at hand. Raising it was out of the question because of both the low in ation and limited projections and because the external scenario continued to pose important risks to the national economy. Lowering the MPR did not seem to be the most prudent, at least for as long as there was no rm evidence of a greater deceleration of domestic demand and output. In his opinion, it was natural for the external scenario to have a more signi cant effect on the Chilean economy in the second part of the year, as was happening in several countries in the region. However, for the time being, those effects were limited. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board members Marshall, Claro, and Vial, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 5.0% (annual). 
