MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY 
MEETING Monetary policy meeting N°200 held on 11 July 2013. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board member; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Present as well: Felipe Larraín, Minister of Finance. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Angel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attester; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Gabriel Aparici, acting Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Claudio Raddatz, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Market Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Advisory Department Manager; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Erika Arraño, acting Executive Secretary of the Governor’s Cabinet; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
Both the background information as well as the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
2. Options 
On this occasion, given the information garnered since the last meeting, the Research Division presented as relevant options to either keep the monetary policy interest rate (MPR) at 5.0% or to lower it by 25 basis points, to 4.75%. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
The decision to lower the MPR could be justi ed by the evidence of the reduced external impulse to the Chilean economy resulting from the slower growth forecast for Chile’s trading partners, the reduction in the terms of trade, and less favorable external funding conditions. The biggest concern was the observed slowdown in the Chinese economy due to its weight in commodity markets, particularly for copper. Incoming foreign trade and manufacturing indicators for China did not anticipate a reversal of the trend in the coming months. In addition, there had been some frictions in this country’s domestic nancial markets. Meanwhile, recent U.S. gures had con rmed the better growth outlook and also the possible reduction in the asset purchase plan for the rest of the year. This situation had triggered some extra volatility in international nancial markets and a worsening of nancial conditions facing emerging economies, Chile included. Still, notwithstanding such volatility, it was likely that monetary policy adjustments in advanced economies would be gradual, keeping its medium-term risks in check. 
As for the option of keeping the MPR unchanged, it coincided with the market consensus expectation for this meeting, so it should not affect the evolution of the interest rate curve. This option could be justi ed in the fact that, so far, the slowdown in domestic output and demand had been gradual, and nal demand (i.e., xed investment and consumption) looked strong. Also, employment continued to grow at trend rates and the labor market was still tight. 
Projections in the baseline scenario assumed that the deceleration of nal demand would deepen further during some quarters. Some preliminary indicators were consistent with this outlook, including results from con dence surveys and expectations of rms and consumers, as well as the bank lending survey. 
In ation had behaved as foreseen in June’s Monetary Policy Report, and headline in ation had approached the tolerance range, while core in ation remained around 1% annually and expectations remained around the target. 
Finally, with respect to monetary policy transmission, despite the higher international volatility, nancial conditions in domestic markets had remained fairly stable in terms of interest rates and exchange rates. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
All the Board members pointed out that, in general, the recent events were aligned with the scenario outlined in June’s Monetary Policy Report. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Internationally, all the Board members underscored the recovery of the U.S. economy and the movements it had continued to generate in the nancial markets, including increases in long-term interest rates and the appreciation of the dollar. They also commented on the Chinese slowdown and the reduction in China’s growth outlook, which was taking its toll on the copper price. Several Board members referred to the consequences of such developments on the external nancial conditions facing Chile. One Board member mentioned the increase in the dollar-denominated long-term interest rates and the somewhat smaller increase in sovereign spreads, but pointed out that access to credit was still favorable despite the fact that debt issuance abroad had diminished. 
In the opinion of one Board member, although the external scenario had experienced a marginal deterioration, negative risks had intensi ed signi cantly. This, because although the recovery of the U.S. economy was good news, the higher funding costs that resulted were not so good for some economies in peripheral Europe or in Latin America needing substantial external nancing. Also because there was the possibility of a sharper or longer-lasting slowdown in China, especially considering the behavior of its nancial system. Finally, another risk factor was the political turmoil in Egypt due to its possible effects on the oil market and because its unfolding going forward was unclear. 
Regarding the local economy, all the Board members stressed the slowdown in output and demand. About the latter, they noted that its most evident effect was on investment, while a number of consumption indicators were still dynamic. 
One Board member posited that the strength of consumption relied on the robust growth in wage income and on still optimistic household expectations despite a recent decline. However, several Board members said that, at any rate, various indicators anticipated a deceleration going forward, as was the case for both business and consumer expectations—the latter had been good predictors of changes in private consumption trends on previous episodes according to one Board member—, and some credit gures. One Board member noted that lending was evolving moderately and continued to post a slowdown in several of its components, but it was clear anyway that credit was producing no particular stimulus on consumption. 
In discussing in ation, all the Board members noted that it was normalizing as expected, and approaching the tolerance range, while expectations continued to place it around 3% in the policy horizon. 
As they turned to monetary policy, all the Board members agreed that the best option was to hold the MPR at 5.0% and a number of them mentioned the need to include some downward bias for the near future in the press release. 
In the opinion of one Board member, both options put forward by the Research Division were valid and consistent with a limited adjustment of the MPR in the second half of this year. The option to lower the rate was based on a body of information that pointed to a consolidation of the slowdown in both output and demand. Although it was less visible in consumption, the data generally suggested that some of its fundamentals would start to give in the coming months. Meanwhile, keeping the policy rate at provided time to gather more information on this issue to better estimate the pace at which the economy was decelerating. This same Board member went on to point out that the risk of arriving too late was smaller, but that a scenario was being con gured where a small reduction in the rate (as in the baseline scenario of the Monetary Policy Report) was more clearly justi ed, and it should not be necessary to wait too long. 
In the view of one Board member, what was new this time was that the two options seemed pretty balanced in terms of their fundamentals and, for the same reason, the decision was now more complex than in earlier meetings. On one hand, the reasons for a cut had become stronger. Risks from abroad, especially China had gained importance, particularly for the Chilean economy. The risk of expenditure becoming excessive or reverting its slowdown had moderated and, at the same time, the risk of not acting in time was emerging and was signi cant. All this led to recommend quick action. On the other hand, the arguments in favor of waiting a while were still quite strong. The consumption trend and the tight labor market advised acting prudently. Market agents had incorporated the monetary policy adjustment in their expectations and, accordingly, the expected effects had already begun occurring at least partially, which meant that the decision had become less urgent. Expectations at this meeting pointed very largely to keeping the rate at and any policy diversion would entail risk that seemed unwise to assume. After weighing all the information, he felt marginally inclined for the option of not changing the policy rate. 
One Board member noted that the Chilean peso had depreciated less than the currencies of other emerging economies. An increase in the nominal exchange rate could result in either in ationary pressures or a change in relative prices. The best thing was for relative prices to respond rapidly in real terms, because adjustments would thus affect quantities less. However, continued this Board member, in the event of an increase in relative prices in favor of the exchange rate, he wondered what the counterpart would be, as wages had remained extremely buoyant and the rising oil price was another complication. In this context, he concluded, it seemed prudent to keep the policy rate where it was, pending more certainty in indicators of domestic slowdown, to trigger the necessary and appropriate changes in relative prices. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
According to a Board member, holding the policy rate was consistent with an economy where several variables were still dynamic, including retail sales, consumption and the labor market. Lowering the rate by 25 basis points was consistent with a worsened external scenario, with a sharper than expected output deceleration, with actual and expected in ation being contained, and the possibility of an also sharper slowdown in spending. If the signs of slowdown mentioned in the press release and the minutes of the last monetary policy meeting persisted, it would have consequences for monetary policy. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board members Marshall, Claro and Vial, to maintain the annual monetary policy rate at 5.0%. 
