MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 212, held on 15 July 2014. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Enrique Marshall, Vice-Governor; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member. 
Present the Finance Undersecretary, Alejandro Micco. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policy Division Director; Francisco Ruiz, acting Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Erika Arraño, Executive Secretary to the Governor’s Cabinet; Natalia Gallardo, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
2. Options 
Based on the data known after the last meeting, the Research Division presented as relevant options keeping the monetary policy rate (MPR) at 4% or lowering it by 25 basis points, to 3.75%. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
The international scenario had not changed signi cantly. Prospects for China were stabilizing and external nancial conditions were similar to those of the previous month. 
Domestically, in the second quarter activity in non-natural resources sectors and nal demand had grown less than forecast in the last Monetary Policy Report. This had pulled down growth estimates for 2014, both internal and those of market analysts. This new projection, as well as the one contained in June’s Monetary Policy Report ran below the estimated rate of potential growth, so the economy would have continued to accumulate output gaps, easing domestic in ationary pressures and the current account de cit forecast for the year. Although the output gap estimate was uncertain, and the drop in investment coupled with a decelerating average labor productivity advised revising the potential growth rate downward, this would not change the diagnosis that the economy had built up gaps in recent quarters because of growing GDP of non- natural resources sectors. 
In June, for the second consecutive month, the magnitude of in ation surprises had been smaller than in previous months, which brought signi cant surprises relating mostly to the direct and indirect effects of the peso depreciation. The items in the CPI most directly linked to the wage trends continued with their inertial evolution, while nominal wages had picked up in recent months. Short- term in ation expectations remained stable, as did in ation expectations over the monetary policy horizon. 
As for the options proposed, keeping the MPR unchanged would allow waiting for more information about the convergence of in ation to 3%, as envisaged in the Report’s baseline scenario. While that scenario assumed that in ation rising above 4% was a temporary event, the magnitude and consistency of higher than expected rates in previous months, along with persistent wage growth would justify some degree of caution in this area. This risk was attenuated somewhat by the recent labor market developments, in particular the slowing salaried employment and the apparent increase in the unemployment rate as it accommodated the dynamics of self-employment. 
Meanwhile, the option of lowering the MPR was consistent with the Report’s scenario, which foresaw the MPR below 4.0% to ensure convergence of in ation to 3% within the policy horizon. The fact that the growth forecast was lower than the Report’s assumption attested to the need to provide additional monetary stimulus. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
3. Monetary policy decision 
At the international level, all the Board members agreed that the major trends of recent times showed no major changes. One Board member noted that signals were mixed, but news coming from the United States and China left a rather positive feeling after all, so he was surprised by the deteriorated outlook of some emerging economies, including more than a few in Latin America. One Board member said that the external outlook was slightly more positive than a month back, due to better conditions in the United States and China, and because the prices of commodities, particularly copper, had increased, while global nancial conditions remained favorable. He added that this could change if the Fed accelerated the process of monetary normalization, which was a risk to keep in mind. One Board member noted that as time passed it had been con rmed that external nancing conditions and the terms of trade were still better than could have been anticipated a few quarters ago. And although this did not alter the overall analysis that changes in the global cycle were affecting emerging countries, for now it helped limit the impact that the change in external conditions had had on the dynamics of several developing countries, Chile included. 
About the domestic scenario, all ve Board members stressed that incoming gures con rmed weak output and demand. One Board member noted the presence of a slowdown that continued to surprise and was now spreading to private consumption and related productive industries, plus no indicators signaling a turning point. He added that when compared to the May scenario, domestic output and demand levels foreseen for the second and third quarters of this year had fallen by nearly one percentage point. Accordingly, there were many components of demand and expectations—such as con dence indicators; volume imports of intermediate and capital goods, excluding transportation, and construction materials, among others—that were approaching their three- year-ago levels, undoing all the growth accumulated in the period. At the margin, many of them had smoothed growth or fallen further, and the latest indicators of loans, lending standards, monetary aggregates and credit demand perceptions con rmed the weakness of aggregate output and demand. Perhaps the only component of demand that had a positive expansion trend was non- durable consumption, but this had to do with the expansion of the real wage mass, which was slowing as well. One Board member said he found positive that agreement had been reached around the proposed tax reform, because, details aside, it should have a positive effect on the economic recovery process, particularly via its effect on expectations. 
One Board member stressed that the credit market re ected constraints on both the demand side and the supply side, which translated into a slowdown in 
lending that was quite pronounced in some components. One Board member noted that the tighter credit conditions in the margin were probably the natural response, resulting from the cycle the economy was undergoing. However, he added, in general, nancial conditions and interest rates were still fairly good, and in some cases at record lows, re ecting that monetary conditions had adequately accompanied this process. Another Board member recalled that the MPR had already been reduced by 100 basis points since last October and that long-term rates remained at particularly low levels. In addition, borrowing costs were at their lowest in years or ever, even below their levels of 2008- 2009. Similarly, mortgage rates were near their all-time lows, while spreads on short-term rates were very low and liquidity was abundant. All this led to the conclusion that the more expansionary monetary policy, coupled with prevailing market conditions, were producing a signi cant boost in the economy. 
Turning to the labor market, all the Board members pointed at the observed divergence between the slower growth in salaried employment and higher self-employment. One Board member noted that the big picture showed the labor market still adjusting according to the usual cyclical lag. Another Board member noted that the labor market was giving signals of bigger gaps, but this did not yet re ect in unemployment indicators or the behavior of wages, which had not lost their previous dynamism. One Board member noted that while employment continued to grow owing almost exclusively to the contribution of self-employment, nominal wages had continued to accelerate and it could be foreseen that this would be strengthened in the short term via adjustments in the minimum wage. 
About in ation, all the Board members noted that recent gures lent support to a scenario where the current level of in ation would be transitory. One Board member said that despite the slight surprise of low in ation in June, in the months to come it should rise again above 4.5% because of higher energy prices. However, he said, this did not alter the view that the high in ation rates were temporary and would return to the tolerance range early next year. 
One Board member noted that although June’s in ation had been lower than expected, one should not forget that its y-o-y variation continued to exceed the upper limit of the tolerance range and that, according to the Bank’s own projections, another hike was possible before returning to the range. Furthermore, beyond the data of the last month, the in ation dynamic had been higher than expected. All in all, he said, it was still valid that the high present levels were transitory, because depreciation had largely been transmitted already and the slowdown in growth would widen the output gaps, easing the pressures on prices. One Board member noted that despite downward revisions to growth 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
projections, possible downward adjustments to the potential growth estimate could suggest that such disin ationary gaps would not necessarily be generated. Furthermore, similar ndings could be obtained from nancial prices or other indicators, for example, the interest rate structure. This, in his opinion, explained the fact that medium-term expectations remained comfortably around 3% and projections for the MPR were similar to those considered in the last Report. 
As for the monetary policy decision, one Board member noted that the options considered had to be chosen in such a way to provide temporal consistency to the collegiate process of decision-making by the Board. Thus, with a core in ation scenario identical to that of a couple of months back, but signi cantly worsened output indicators and lower medium-term private in ation expectations, he thought it implausible to consider at this meeting the same options as two months ago. In addition, he continued, it did not seem consistent with having kept the downward bias in the last few meetings. In the opinion of this Board member, this time the option of lowering the MPR by 50 basis points was at least equally plausible to that of holding the MPR xed. All in all, he believed that lowering the rate by 25 basis points was more advisable, partly because making a larger cut might be too big a surprise. 
One Board member noted that all the information at hand inclined him rather to hold the monetary policy rate. However, he believed that opting for reducing the MPR was more consistent with the scenario outlined in the last Report and with almost unanimous market expectations in that sense. Otherwise, they would be risking giving a signal of doubt about the transience of in ation deviations of in ation, something that was not supported by the data. 
One Board member contended that all the elements considered justi ed validating the working assumption in the Report, which projected that one to two reductions in the MPR would be required during the second half. Macroeconomic conditions had evolved in line with propositions in the Report, and if anything, a slightly more pronounced slowdown was expected, while annual in ation projections remained high in the short term, with a decline expected towards 2015. Therefore, he thought it best to cut 25 basis points off the MPR, and to remain cautious over the higher in ation, and thus deliver a signal that further adjustments might be possible, but making it clear that the decision to lower the MPR in this meeting should not be construed as the beginning of a downward cycle. 
One Board member said he shared the view that the economy needed further monetary stimulus. Therefore, in his opinion the dilemma was whether to proceed immediately or was it more advisable to wait until the in ation 
scenario cleared up. In his view, the latest gures tilted the scale in favor of the option to lower the rate. Weak demand and output persisted and had even intensi ed, while the diagnosis of a transitory rise in in ation remained in full force. However, he concluded, annual in ation was stuck at relatively high levels and nominal wages continued to observe certain dynamism. The Bank’s diagnosis assumed that this situation should moderate going forward. However, for prudential reasons, what was called for was to maintain a downward policy bias, but always subject to every piece of information coming in. 
One Board member noted that the option to hold the MPR was more consistent with in ation still above the upper limit of the tolerance range, and that surprises in the immediate future could not be ruled out. Holding was also consistent with wages still growing faster than target in ation and the expected increase in productivity combined. However, the fact that a moderation was expected for growth in both in ation and wages in the coming months due to weaker activity, allowed to prefer a reduction in the MPR this time around All in all, he nished, the slowdown in output should not jeopardize the Board’s calm and prudence, and therefore hasty action should be avoided. Actually, he added, he believed that measures taken in recent months, both gradually and unhurriedly, but determined all the same, should set the tone for future actions by the Board. The market had validated the Board’s actions and, ex post, they were seen as a successful strategy, given that the Central Bank had accompanied the cycle with a more expansionary monetary policy, ahead of the facts, but with no rush. In his view, this was the best contribution that the institution could do to promote the healthy and sustainable growth of the national economy. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marshall, and Board members Claro, Vial and García, to lower the annual monetary policy rate by 25 basis points, to 3.75%. 
