MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 223, held on 11 June 2015. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Enrique Marshall, Vice-Governor; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board Member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Rodrigo Valdés, and, on his behalf, during the second part of the meeting, the Finance Undersecretary, Alejandro Micco. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policies Division Director; Gloria Peña, Macroeconomic Statistics Manager; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
Incoming data since the statistical cutoff date of June’s Monetary Policy Report had been in line with forecasts, so the domestic and the external economic outlook had shown no major changes. 
In the world economy, movements in the nancial markets stood out. Long-term interest rates continued on an upward trend in the main developed economies, while yield curves were steepening. Although some of these behaviors could 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
be attributed to the better medium-term macroeconomic outlook, everything suggested that the decompression of term premiums had also played a key role. In this context, most emerging market currencies had depreciated against the dollar, while long-term rates and risk premiums had risen. The value of other assets had also declined and capital was owing out of most emerging markets. This re ected the nancial markets’ high sensitivity to changes in economic perceptions in the developed economies, especially regarding the evolution of their respective monetary policies. It also re ected, however, that the divergence among their monetary policies could be handled without affecting the proper functioning of the markets, as was assumed in the baseline projection scenario. Nonetheless, the risks associated to disruptive events in nancial markets were still present, and high volatility in nancial markets could still be expected, in particular, sharp exchange rate uctuations in the coming months. 
On the domestic front, both in ation and output data had shown no big deviations from the assumptions behind the projections in the June Monetary Policy Report. The Imacec, plus different measurements of expectations and foreign trade data, among others, con rmed that output would rise at a slower pace than had been expected a few months back. Meanwhile, although in May annual in ation had returned to the tolerance range, the projections indicated that it should rise and hover above 4% in the following months. The exchange rate increase above the levels prevailing at the statistical closing of the Report would delay somewhat the convergence to 3%, but it was very likely that during the following months the currency would uctuate signi cantly, altering this projection. In this context, in ation could be expected to be more volatile too, so the communication regarding its expected medium-term path would be particularly important. The Research Division saw no major changes in this regard from what had been proposed in the last Report. 
Hence, neither did the monetary policy option preferred by the Research Division differ from the one in that Report. Thus, it was estimated that the economic slowdown made it necessary to hold on to the monetary impulse for longer than previously thought. In particular, in order to ensure the convergence of in ation over the usual horizon, the policy rate would have to be kept at 3% at least until the end of 2015. 
The option of further cuts to the rate had to be overruled again because, in a context where in ation had been in the upper boundary or above the tolerance range for over a year, and where it was believed it would remain there still for some months, it didn’t seem wise to heighten the already signi cant monetary impulse. This, especially considering that, as con dence grew, the economy should also grow more strongly towards the end of this year. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Although there was a risk for the anchoring of expectations derived from in ation remaining high for several months, there were a number of arguments that advised overruling the option of raising the MPR. The arguments put forward at the last meeting were further supported by the evident deceleration of wages. While this was partly associated with one-time events, it showed that the effects of indexation had already begun to fade out. Moreover, economic agents’ expectations continued to show no signs of recovery, which raised more doubts about this crucial assumption for the recovery of economic activity and, therefore, for the evolution of in ation over the medium term. 
Thus, the Research Division proposes as the sole relevant option to keep the MPR at 3%. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
About the external economy, all the Board members commented on the movements of long-term interest rates and parities around the world, noting that their volatility responded to the imminent process of monetary policy normalization in the United States. In the opinion of one Board member these were issues that should continue to be monitored because the time was approaching when the Fed would nally begin to raise the policy rate. One Board member said that as this process took place, the nancial burden on governments, businesses and even households would increase accordingly, which would result in moderated dynamism and a lengthening of this process. 
One Board member noted that although on aggregate there had been no major changes in the macroeconomic picture, gures showed that in Japan the rst quarter had been better than expected and in the US it had been worse. Some Board members mentioned that the gures in China suggested that the Chinese economy could slow down further. In this context, one Board member stated that, in his opinion, the nancial easing measures were rather lifting an unbearable nancial burden on local governments and businesses, but it seemed improbable that those who were already highly indebted were in a position borrow more to nance new investments. He concluded by noting that rising interest rates, a weaker dollar and a sluggish Chinese economy did not paint the best picture for commodity markets, which would surely continue to be re ected in the price of copper. 
About the domestic economy, all ve Board members commented on the weak economic activity. Some Board members added that it had been somewhat weaker than foreseen and that the latest gures still showed no signi cant change 
in its dynamism. One Board member said that the data con rmed the diagnosis that the acceleration of the fourth quarter of 2014 and the rst quarter of this year had not continued into the second quarter. Still, the GDP of non-natural resources sectors continued to show a moderate growth rate, consistent with the scenario depicted in the Report. In his view, from the standpoint of output, growth and demand, the climate of pessimism was obviously playing a part, and its future evolution and its implications for medium-term in ationary pressures was something to be monitored carefully. 
One Board member recalled that the Report associated the weak demand, particularly from investment, with the discussion about expectations. In this sense, the Monetary Policy Report was clear in mentioning that the latter had been an important component in explaining the investment decline of recent quarters and was essential to analyze the speed of its recovery going forward. He added that, in his view, an extremely important discussion was impending regarding the communication about in ation, monetary policy and the pace of recovery, namely potential growth. He said that a deep analysis was needed in order to better understand the weakness of non-mining investment in recent years, the impact it had made on potential GDP and the possibility of a sustained recovery in investment and output indicators without, for example, a depreciation of the real exchange rate. In his opinion, perhaps the discussion about this weak investment was not exhausted in the debate about con dence, and there could be important structural elements to consider when analyzing potential GDP and the in ation trajectory towards 2016. 
One Board member noted that private spending gures pointed at a marginal weakening and showed that con dence indicators were failing to pick up, fueled by negative news coming from various areas. All of this drew attention to the risk of the economy remaining sluggish for longer than expected. 
One Board member said that what was most remarkable was the strength of the labor market, which seemed to be gradually expanding into more sectors. In his view, in a context of quite weak expectations, this could be the endogenous factor with the best chance to sustain the recovery of domestic demand in 2015. 
On the in ation side, several Board members remarked that in ation and wages had dropped. One of them thought that this tended to con rm that the central point in the price dynamic had been the combination of a very persistent exchange rate shock with the propagation to other prices via indexation components. He added that it seemed not to be the case that output gaps were causing additional in ationary pressures, even though the unemployment rate had declined slightly from last year. Still, he continued, the downward surprise 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
from the price and wage dynamics was particularly informative, because there had been a string of upside surprises and, therefore, one should be careful with their medium-term implications. 
Some Board members stressed that the gures should always be processed with caution. While it could not be ruled out that annual in ation could be above the tolerance range again for one or more months due to the incidence of speci c prices, everything continued to point to a gradual return to the target. The behavior of nominal wages in the last month was encouraging, but again, it was just one number, so it had to be interpreted with caution. One Board member said that news about in ation and wages, along with weak output and demand, pointed in the direction of lower in ationary pressures in the future. In the case of weak output and demand, of course, there was the issue of measuring the capacity gaps, particularly considering that the unemployment rate was still quite low. 
Several Board members examined the effects of the peso depreciation on the in ation trajectory. According to one Board member this was the main factor of concern for the in ation trajectory, although at the moment this was seen as a limited risk, but it was very likely that the exchange rate volatility would continue. One Board member said that unless there were changes in the scenario that triggered a signi cant and persistent depreciation of the real exchange rate, the recent movements in international nancial markets would not put the gradual convergence of in ation to 3% as described in the Report into question. However, it could cause major movements in currency parities and in short- term in ation expectations, which the market should consider in its analyses. 
Turning to the policy decision, several Board members noted that the news received since the publication of the Report did not alter the outlook depicted in it. One Board member said that the option that emerged most clearly was to hold the MPR unchanged, as it was dif cult to nd arguments for any other decision. Thus, it was most advisable to reaf rm the overall orientation that had been described in the Monetary Policy Report. 
One Board member argued that monetary policy had been very expansionary for a long period of time already. Moreover, the communication had been explicit in stating that the MPR was projected to remain at for an additional extended period, but obviously this would depend on the internal and external macroeconomic developments and their effects on in ation and projections over the policy horizon. Meanwhile, long-term rates, although somewhat higher than their minimums of a few months back, were still particularly low. Lending interest rates were also at low levels. The expansionary monetary policy had 
been maintained despite in ation persisting at the upper bound of or above the tolerance range for over a year. This, of course, under the premise that it was a temporary phenomenon and that in ation would return to the target in the near future. Actually, expectations over the policy horizon were still anchored at 3%. Nevertheless, the persistence of in ation at these levels left no room for further monetary stimulus. Thus, the option of reducing the MPR could be quickly ruled out as inadmissible. The option of raising it, on the other hand, was inconsistent with the current stage of the business cycle or with the projection that in ation would gradually diminish towards the target. It should be kept in mind that in the Report’s baseline scenario, where output would post some acceleration in the second half of the year, the monetary normalization was foreseen to begin during the rst part of next year. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marshall, and Board members Claro, Vial and García, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3%. 
