MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary Policy Meeting No. 235, held on 16 June 2016. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member: Pablo García, Board member; Mario Marcel, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Rodrigo Valdés. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policy Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
The data made available since the statistical closing of the June Monetary Policy Report had generally been in line with that Report’s forecasts. The low growth of April’s Imacec was consistent with the vision that the improved rst-quarter indicators contained important transitory components and, on the contrary, in the remaining quarters of the year the economy would expand at a slower pace than foreseen in March and below potential. As had 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
been foreseen, the data showed that those sectors more closely related with investment were particularly weak and that the labor market was making further adjustments. 
In ation’s ongoing process of convergence to the 3% target continued at near the projected speed. This process was mainly associated with the relative stability of the exchange rate which, despite ups and downs, had not changed much from August 2015. In fact, the fall in headline in ation owed largely to the drop in in ation of the more exchange-rate-sensitive items, principally imported goods. On the ip side, most non-tradable items in the basket posted lower in ation, re ecting indexation e ects and still fairly bounded capacity gaps. 
About the impulse that the Chilean economy would receive from abroad, incoming news did not indicate major variations from the Report’s diagnosis, and the main risks remained. China had succeeded in growing in line with its government’s objectives, but relying on policies designed to boost the economy that might not be easily sustainable. In the US, although the Federal Reserve (Fed) had announced that it was inclined to proceed more gradually, the di erences with the fed funds’trajectory expected by the market were still large. Political risks, particularly those associated with Brexit, had increased. 
In June’s Report, the Board had estimated that, to ensure inflation’s convergence to 3%, a trajectory of the monetary policy rate (MPR) as could be inferred from nancial asset prices at its statistical cuto date was consistent with the baseline scenario. This meant keeping the MPR where it was for several months, and gradually returning to its more neutral levels as the economy resumed stronger growth. Thus, the option of keeping the MPR at 3.5% emerged as the most consistent with the indicators examined at this meeting. 
Anyway, in ation was still high and, although it was expected to return to the target range within a few months, there were undeniable risks that, as stated in the Report, were unbiased. However, it was reasonable to think that after more than two years above the upper bound of the range, a signi cant upward deviation of in ation would be costlier than a deviation with the opposite sign. 
The convergence of in ation could take longer for one of two reasons. First, non-tradable in ation was still high and, although it had declined as expected, as the unemployment rate was still low and nominal wages were growing 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
soundly, the process could be slower. However, this risk had decreased considerably in the past few quarters. The labor market revealed a signi cant adjustment, even sharper than projected. Incoming data for employment and wages pointed in the same direction and unit labor costs had slowed down signi cantly. Furthermore, the comparatively high employee turnover rates in the Chilean labor market suggested that rms would be able to adjust their payrolls fairly soon. The other reason was that new episodes of exchange rate depreciation could not be ruled out, especially in a context where external risks relating to the Fed, China’s growth stabilization and the British Referendum were still present. In the short term, the e ects of these developments on in ation were clearly upward, but their e ects on the in ation forecast two years out were far from obvious, because they depended on the persistence of the shocks and their e ects on output and in ation expectations. 
In this context, while recognizing that there were important risks for the convergence of in ation, the Research Division thought they did not warrant considering a preventive increase of the MPR this time, especially because of the successive downward revisions to the growth outlook, the RER was in line with its fundamentals, in ation had decreased as estimated and expected in ation had remained well anchored at 3%. This by no means implied ruling out the option to raise the MPR in the foreseeable future, because in the most likely scenario there was still the need for additional increases in the MPR to ensure the convergence of in ation to 3% in the policy horizon. Accordingly, in the opinion of the Research Division, holding the MPR at 3.5% dominated as the only plausible decision. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
All ve Board members agreed that the news of the month con rmed the scenario proposed in the June Report. On the international front, several Board members noted the volatility of the nancial markets associated to the upcoming Brexit vote, which could be aggravated in case of a Leave win. One Board member noted that many policy makers, international organizations and analysts had warned about the negative impact of a potential exit of the UK from the European Union. The possibility of a Brexit causing more uncertainty, nancial turmoil, risk aversion and currency volatility had also been mentioned by the Fed in its latest policy meeting communication. In his view, these reaction and fears associated to Brexit revealed the markets’ sensitivity to new shocks when the wounds of the crisis that had begun in 2008 had not healed completely. This was particularly true in Europe, which 
was showing the early signs of a stronger recovery, but where important domestic imbalances remained and the nancial sector was still perceived as vulnerable. One Board member said that, given the importance of London as a global nancial center and particularly its strong link with both the Eurozone and the US, short-term convulsions could not be discarded, together with real medium-term e ects that might alter the baseline scenario. One Board member drew attention to the recent increase in the risk of the UK leaving the EU, which would clearly be bad news, but where the e ects on the Chilean economy were di cult to quantify. 
The Fed’s decision regarding the future course of its policy rate was also mentioned by all the Board members as a source of risk. One Board member noted that there were still ambiguous signals about the actual pace of the process. One Board member opined that the Fed Chairwoman’s message had been quite clear in that, on one hand, they still expected a continued process of policy rate hikes and, on the other, such hikes would be more gradual than had been predicted in the previous meeting, over the entire projection horizon. Overall, they still indicated that it was highly probable that there would be two more hikes during 2016. Certainly, the attening of the policy rate’s trajectory slope should calm down the markets. However, the fact that markets had responded by reducing the likelihood they assigned to hikes in the short term, to the point of dismissing them for this year, was cause for worry. His impression was that the risk of nancial volatility associated with a policy rate hike by the Fed in July or September had increased. Of course, the market’s expectations about the Fed’s actions could change at any time as information trickled in. 
One Board member stressed that what looked like an imminent increase in the benchmark rate by the Fed had not materialized, contributing to a widespread drop in interest rates and a depreciation of the dollar, based on the employment report. In his opinion, the Fed’s communication had been a little confusing so more clarity was to be expected going forward to gure out whether the interest rate hike would be postponed more de nitively or the normalization would be carried out as announced. Although these two options seemed extreme, he thought that the debate was at the core of the determination of the nancial conditions the rest of the world—especially emerging economies—would face in the coming months. This dilemma, together with other volatility events of recent weeks, called for a specially prudent attitude, mainly because of its e ects on capital ows, currencies and commodity prices. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member added that although doubts about China had eased lately, they remained a medium-term risk, and Latin America was performing poorly, much in uenced by the negative numbers from Brazil and Venezuela, although with some countries (e-g- Peru) that were again increasing more robustly. In the opinion of one Board member the emerging world showed a similar scenario to last month’s. However, it was still possible that, facing louder noise in nancial markets, signi cant currency-related and external nancing stress would ensue. 
Domestically, several Board members mentioned the slow activity that could be inferred from the recent data. In the opinion of one Board member, the gures in this area supported the view that the second part of the year would be weak. Broadly, employment gures were consistent with this view. One Board member said that the low growth in April's Imacec, although it could have been in uenced by some speci c factors, had prevented making too optimistic an interpretation of the rst-quarter growth gures. In particular, the decelerating expansion of the wage mass and the weak investment foreseen for the coming months imposed limits on domestic demand growth, in line with the GDP growth range of 1.25 to 2% foreseen in the June Monetary Policy Report. Nevertheless, he noted, this scenario was not free of risks, such as a weaker performance of the labor market and investment. One Board member stressed that among the domestic risks was the usual uncertainty surrounding the pace of output and demand. Not only there was still a signi cant contraction of mining investment, but also the evolution of the labor market would be essential for the resilience of other expenditure components, especially consumption. 
One Board member said that, after a better-than-expected rst quarter, especially in terms of velocities, the economy had decelerated in April and that, beyond the volatilities of each speci c month, in the coming quarters the economy would grow less on average. Cause for concern was that investment expectations continued to dwindle and a further decline was expected this year. He added that the latest gures of the labor market looked weaker, especially in salaried job creation, even though the unemployment rate remained low. However, one could naturally expect it to rise in the months to come. 
About in ation, all the Board members agreed that the news of the month con rmed the slow convergence of in ation contained in the June Report. One Board member stated that the domestic demand outlook, combined with a more stable exchange rate, explained the further advances in terms of in ation reduction. May’s CPI variation had revealed a sharper in ection 
in the trend gure, with its rst negative change in almost three years. In terms of y-o-y variation, he emphasized the slowdown in the CPIEFE and that the tradable goods CPI had been lower than 4%. In his view, all of this was indicative of a slowing trend of in ation that had extended over nine months and that, according to the projections of the market and the Bank itself, would continue to slow during the rest of this year and most of 2017. Such trend should re ect in the upcoming in ation gures, where a high basis for comparison between June and August would couple with the inertia of non-tradeable in ation, which was already declining gradually. All of it had led to shortening the time over which in ation was forecast to converge to the 3% target. 
One Board member pointed out that the evolution of in ation still con rmed that the main determinant of its recent dynamic had been the exchange rate uctuations, while the trajectory of nominal wages was in line with bounded underlying labor pressures. He thought that these two elements were key for the convergence trajectory that was foreseen. One Board member underscored the lower goods in ation, which looked consistent with the stabilization of the currency in the last few months. In his opinion, in the coming quarters, and in the absence of a sharp deterioration of the labor market, probably the velocity of convergence of the core component would depend substantially of the exchange rate trajectory. He added that he did not expect any big changes in the in ation dynamic of the more wage related services. 
One Board member noted that from an in ationary standpoint, the main risks came from abroad, as any deterioration could lead to additional depreciations of the peso, a ecting the velocity of in ation’s convergence and even causing new second-round e ects. This was compounded with the fact that services in ation—excluding a few speci c volatile elements—was still high, with no signi cant changes. 
Turning to the policy decision, all ve Board members agreed with the option of keeping the MPR at 3.5%. One Board member said it was inappropriate to consider taking preventive action for the MPR in one or other direction in the current juncture, which could become necessary if the in ation trajectory deviated signi cantly from its road to convergence. One Board member estimated that the Report’s message was still valid and consistent with not changing the MPR in the short term and implementing some additional hikes further ahead, once in ation was consolidated around the target and growth began approaching potential. 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member said that the facts surrounding the MPR trajectory that had dominated the past few meetings were still present. The economy was going through a period of weak performance that had extended beyond expectations, and no signi cant recovery was in sight for the coming quarters. This, together with a scenario that, broadly speaking, assumed a fairly stable exchange rate, warranted the convergence of in ation to 3%. Recent months’ indicators tended to consolidate this vision. Thus, the option of holding the MPR unchanged dominated by far. 
One Board member considered it necessary for monetary policy to remain expansionary, in order to continue with the monetary stimulus that had allowed smoothing the business cycle and had been key to prevent a further slowdown in output and demand. This was also re ected in bank credit growing by around 5% annually in real terms. Also in that in the last Business Perceptions Report the credit cost variable was not brought up as a possible reason behind the lower investment. Accordingly, the option of raising the MPR was not relevant, but it was important to make it clear that it could become so going forward, and actually the Report's baseline scenario assumed an upcoming increase. The prolonged period in ation had remained above the tolerance range was a risk in itself. Thus, special caution was needed in case this situation remained beyond expectations. Costs were high, because if expectations were a ected, a greater adjustment would be required in a context of low growth. Therefore, although the baseline scenario contained symmetric risks for in ation deviations, the related costs were clearly asymmetric. 
About the future MPR trajectory, all the Board members agreed that if the scenario outlined in the June Report came true, ensuring the convergence of in ation to the target would require advancing in the process of monetary policy normalization, at the pace that was implicit in the Report. However, they also noted that any signi cant deviation of in ation’s convergence might alter such pace. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Claro and Board members Vial, García and Marcel, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3.5%. 
