MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 211 held on 12 June 2014. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Enrique Marshall, Vice-Governor; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Alberto Arenas. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Erika Arraño, Executive Secretary to the Governor’s Cabinet; Natalia Gallardo, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
2. Options 
Based on the data known after the last meeting, the Research Division presented as relevant options keeping the monetary policy rate (MPR) at 4% or lowering it by 25 basis points, to 3.75%. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
Like in previous meetings, the international scenario showed no major changes, except that global nancial conditions continued to improve. Concern about economic growth in China and the Chinese nancial system remained. 
In Chile, sectors other than natural resources and nal demand were expanding at a slightly slower pace than had been anticipated in March’s Monetary Policy Report, leading to revise downwards growth projections for the current year. This rate of expansion, down from estimates of potential growth, meant a reduction in the use of installed capacity which, in the medium term, would ease domestic in ationary pressures. It also implied a signi cant moderation of the current account de cit expected this year. Anyway, the estimates for the output gap and the potential growth rate were imprecise. However, even if the potential growth rate fell short of traditional estimates, for example as a result of lower investment, this would not change the diagnosis that gaps were building up marginally in the economy. 
May’s in ation had been as forecast and short-term expectations had been revised downwards. This was a change from earlier months, which brought surprises that responded mainly to direct and indirect effects from the depreciation of the peso. At the same time, the sectors more closely related to the behavior of wages continued to show inertia and the variation rate of nominal wages had been picking up for some months. 
The accumulated surprises had led to upward corrections to the in ation outlook for the year, but it had to be noted that private expectations pointed to a normalization in the coming months, while at longer terms no signi cant changes were observed. 
About the option of keeping the MPR unchanged, this decision would allow accumulating more information on the persistence of the in ationary surprises of previous months. Although in the most likely scenario the increase in annual in ation above 4% was temporary, the string of unexpectedly high in ation rates warranted some degree of caution in this matter. 
Meanwhile, the option of lowering the MPR was consistent with the expectation that output gaps would continue to build up in the economy, which should reduce in ationary pressures over the medium-term. This scenario would require additional monetary stimulus to ensure that in ation would remain around the target in the policy horizon. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
3. Monetary policy decision 
All the Board members agreed that no big changes had occurred in the international scenario. Thus, the recovery in the developed world was consolidating, along with improved global nancial conditions that re ected, among other factors, in lower sovereign and banking premiums, and a rebound in stock markets and capital ows to emerging economies. Some Board members noted that the velocity and intensity of some of these movements were quite unexpected and called for caution. One Board member said that some elements justi ed the increase in international appetite for risk, but one could not rule out that the signs of expansionary monetary policy in some developed countries also played a part. He added that, conceptually, this was an interesting topic as a dilemma for monetary policy, but in practical terms it was important to stress out the caution needed when assessing such favorable external nancial conditions into the coming months. 
About the domestic scenario, all the Board members agreed that the economy was clearly slowing down, which would imply a lower-than- expected GDP growth , and now spreading to private consumption and related sectors. One Board member noted that, in such a scenario, the feasibility of an acceleration, even mild, of output in the immediate future was very low and overall because expectations indicators were on a downward slope. 
One Board member said that what mattered was the current and expected dynamic of domestic demand and how it would affect the ability of businesses to pass on cost pressures to prices. On the investment side, he added, there were some enduring elements explaining its fall, such as —and probably most importantly— the weakening of investment in mining and related industries. In his view, it could also be re ecting certain supply-side limitations and/or the decline in business con dence indexes, factors that could reverse in the future. Importantly, he added, it was hardly believable that the prevailing favorable conditions to access credit could be putting the brakes to the investment dynamic. The same Board member added that the slowdown in consumption, which apparently resulted from the not-so-strong labor market, could clearly generate more output gaps going forward that could trigger a sharper correction to the 2015 in ation forecast. Accordingly, he concluded that this issue had to be examined closely, and it was essential to make an accurate assessment on the economy’s growth capacity, so as to ensure that monetary policy would properly be accompanied by the ongoing cyclical adjustment. 
Regarding the labor market, all the Board members agreed that there were signs that it was losing strength, despite the higher rate of annual increase in nominal 
wages. One Board member indicated that the slowdown in the labor market was incipient, and it was more visible in the employment composition than in employment growth. Other Board member added that although the labor indicators re ected smaller gaps than what could be inferred from economic activity, they did point in the same direction. Another Board member noted that employment, after controlling for the behavior of self-employment and the situation of vacancies, revealed that gaps were building up in the labor market at a pace consistent with an important cyclical weakening. He concluded that the aggregate wage dynamic was masking signi cant degrees of heterogeneity across sectors. 
About the domestic nancial markets, one Board member noted that, although consumer lending was still dynamic, the deceleration in commercial credit was remarkable. In this view, this was an important distinction, because, although consumption presented a signi cant degrees of inertia, the trajectory of the wage mass and the access to credit lent support to a downsloping, yet sustained, consumption trend. Rather, he ended, there were signs of greater dif culty in investment. One Board member argued that although credit growth had moderated, especially for companies, it still showed reasonable growth rates for the current stage of the cycle. In addition, long-term interest rates were in very low levels, close to the lows observed during the recession of 2009, and there was plenty liquidity. 
Regarding in ation, all ve Board members noted that May’s gure had been within expectations, con rming the patterns of recent months in terms of the impact of the peso depreciation on prices. One Board member said that the pressure from margins, that part of the corporate sector had been enduring, was also a factor driving in ation up. However, he continued, the demand slowdown should help to prevent further in ationary pressures going forward, although it was dif cult to anticipate how fast and how strong such adjustment would be. One Board member noted that the vision that the higher in ation would be transitory was shared by the market’s expectations, which remained near the target in the policy horizon. Still, he said, the high y-o-y in ation gures called for careful monitoring. One Board member added that, overall, the in ation dynamics of recent months had exceeded forecasts and, although thought to be temporary, it obviously was cause for concern because the pass-through from the peso depreciation to prices seemed to have exceeded expectations and had even spread to many good and service prices. One Board member added that the pass-through from the exchange rate to prices had been greater than expected, but within the likely ranges for this kind of phenomena, adding some degree of in ationary inertia. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
About the monetary policy decision, all the Board members agreed that the options proposed were the most appropriate. One Board member noted that, in the current scenario, he was inclined to keep the MPR unchanged at least until there was clear evidence that in ation was starting to slow down. 
One Board member said that the current in ation levels revealed that in ationary pressures had been signi cant, but at the same time he believed that a slowdown could be expected and continued to justify not only keeping the MPR in an expansionary territory, but also foreseeing that an additional monetary policy adjustment was possible. However, nancial markets’ conditions and the in ation outlook suggested that keeping the MPR unchanged this time was the most desirable option. 
One Board member said he shared the view that the cycle of adjusting the MPR was not over, so new monetary policy stimulus could be needed, especially if the weakness that was being observed should persist. Hence, he added, the option to cut the MPR seemed perfectly plausible. However, he continued, the annual in ation levels that were being observed raised the need to proceed with caution. A cut this time, when no change in the rate was expected, could be interpreted as some disregard for the short-term in ation dynamic. Therefore, he believed that, in these circumstances, surprises had to be avoided that could erode market con dence. Furthermore, he nished, the MPR had been cut 100 basis points already and was in a rather expansionary level. Money market rates had reacted in the same way and long-term rates were in record lows. From this perspective, he saw no extreme urgency to change the MPR at this moment and waiting a while seemed perfectly possible. 
One Board member noted that, this time around, the option to keep the MPR unchanged clearly dominated. One could not ignore the fact that the MPR had been reduced by 100 basis points and long-term rates remained particularly low. Financing costs were at levels not seen in years and in some cases in their all-time minimums. Mortgage rates were as low as ever. Short-term rate spreads were very low and there was ample liquidity. All this led him to conclude that the more expansionary monetary policy, coupled with improved market conditions, were giving a signi cant boost to the economy. In addition, current and expected in ation, along with the risk of any surprise that could push it above its current gure, called for caution. Moreover, he continued, in the current conditions of economic slowdown, in ation risk was low, but not zero. This, plus the monetary stimulus already in operation, led him to believe that giving a signal of a greater easing was counterproductive. In his opinion, regarding in ation, signals were important. The Bank could not risk de-anchoring expectations and should give a clear message about it. By contrast, he concluded, a drop in the interest rate at this point could be misleading. 
In his minority vote, one Board member estimated that the option of lowering the MPR was best on this occasion. He noted that all the recent information combined weighed signi cantly in the construction of the Monetary Policy Report’s medium-term projections, which depicted a sharper and more prolonged slowdown than did the previous Report, with expected falls in investment and a signi cant slowdown in domestic demand in 2014. This also had an impact on the external accounts, with the current-account de cit being signi cantly smaller than earlier projections, due to higher private savings and the investment contraction. In his view, he added, this scenario still pointed, as in March, to the need for more monetary stimulus. The in ationary effects of the peso depreciation, when the economy was in a decelerating process with no end in sight, were temporary, while the creation of gaps triggered disin ationary pressures in the medium term. Moreover, prices and market expectations had also implicit additional monetary actions. As for the drop in interest rate levels and spreads, he contended, that at this juncture it was the reaction to weak demand and, therefore, merely operating as a buffer and not as a net additional boost to aggregate spending. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marshall, and Board members Claro and Vial, to keep the annual monetary policy rate at 4.0%. Board Member García expressed his decision to lower it by 25 basis points, to 3.75%. 
