MINUTES OF THE 
MONETARY POLICY MEETING 
The monetary policy session N°186 was held on 14 June 2012. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board Member; Sebastián Claro, Board Member; Joaquín Vial, Board Member. 
Present the Minister of Finance, Felipe Larraín. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Kevin Cowan, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Market Manager; Luis Opazo, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Consultant Manager of Communications; Enrique Orellana, Monetary Policy Strategy and Communication Manager; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
1.1 Brie ng 
The information submitted corresponds to the contents of June’s Monetary Policy Report. The presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publically available information may be accessed on the Bank’s web site1/. 
1/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
1.2 Background analysis and comments 
New developments in the Eurozone were discussed; in particular, the effects of the announced capitalization of the Spanish banking system. It was noted that there were many doubts about the scope of such initiative, about who it would bene t, how it would be implemented and, especially, what would be the impact on Spain’s scal position. It was posited that all these doubts were what had driven its risk premium to react negatively, against expectations. 
Signs of contagion among the economies in the Eurozone were also examined. Aside from the correlation among the risk premiums of Spain and Italy, there were signs of contagion to France’s and Germany’s sovereign bonds. The contrast between the behavior of German and Swiss bond rates stood out. While the rates on Switzerland’s two-year bonds had even crossed into negative territory, their German counterparts posted some increase, possibly suggesting that investors were considering that they were not as safe as they used to be. 
About the local economy, there was discussion about the recent functioning of monetary and nancial markets. It was pointed out that, in general, nancial variables were responding fairly normally, with limited movements. It was noted that capital ows into Chile had not changed much, and the return of pension funds to the country had also contributed to such normality. It was also noted that, despite further tensions in world markets, no major changes in liquidity conditions were observed in Chile or other relevant economies. 
2. Options 
On this occasion, with the information gathered since the last meeting, the Research Division proposed as the relevant option to keep the monetary policy interest rate (MPR) at 5.0%. 
The March Monetary Policy Report had outlined an external scenario with developed economies growing slowly, continuing frictions in external nancial markets, and lower terms of trade than in 2011. The June Report kept these elements, but acknowledged a further worsening of prospects for the Eurozone, due to more acute scal and nancial tensions. Incoming information showed a weaker performance of the U.S., China, and other emerging economies. All the above resulted in a downward revision of the world growth forecast for 2012 and 2013, as well as of commodity prices. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Domestically, the March Report had stated that the output gap was closed, the labor market was tight and, accordingly, the Chilean economy should continue to evolve around trend. First-quarter output gures had been somewhat stronger than forecast, which meant that domestic capacity remained tight. However, the revised projections for the rest of the year assumed less dynamism in the second half, because of the higher international uncertainty and the reduced external demand. 
With regard to in ation, the March Report foresaw that it would be in the upper zone of the tolerance range in the rst half of the year, particularly because of the incidence of fuel price increases. This short-term risk had abated, considering the recent behavior of the world prices of oil, oil derivatives and foodstuffs, and of in ation gures in Chile. Core in ation indicators—in particular the services component—and nominal wages were more stable, which supported the diagnosis of a closed output gap, but it was a factor to be monitoring. 
The alternative of raising the MPR was ruled out considering the worsening of international conditions and their possible impact on the Chilean economy. It was also seen as less valid because at the same time there was a convergence of the pace of growth in output and employment to trend rates, core in ation had been lower in the last few months, and the latest behavior of the more volatile components—fuels and foods—also contributed to reduce in ation. 
As for the option of not changing the MPR, it was warranted in that its current level was within a range of neutral values, while the economy was in a situation of a closed output gap and in ation near the target, which provided time and exibility to wait and collect information on the external developments and their impact in Chile. Holding the policy rate at was what the market expected most, so it should have no major effect on the evolution of the interest rate curve. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
All the Board members underscored the sharp deterioration of the Eurozone’s situation, which made more extreme scenarios more likely to occur. They also noted how this situation had affected international nancial markets. 
Special attention was paid to the case of Spain and the announced nancial support for its banks. Several Board members mentioned the substantial increase in the cost of debt nancing for the Spanish government. One Board member argued that its level was approaching those that triggered the bailout programs for Greece, Ireland and Portugal. He added that the fact that this occurred after 
the announcement of the nancial aid suggested that the country was on the brink of crossing a threshold that would make this a regional crisis, not just limited to the peripheral countries. 
Another Board member, called the attention to the risk-premium of the Italian debt, whose correlation with Spain’s was close to one. He pointed out that Italy has no degrees of freedom to deal with problems in its banking system, as it has the zone’s biggest public debt. He also pointed out that, with the French banking system being one of its largest creditors, a potential contagion to Italy would necessarily spread to France, raising doubts about whether the stronger economies in the region could sustain the stability of the zone. The recent evidence that Germany was also showing increased volatility of its sovereign spread—highly correlated with that of its peripheral partners and with France’s— pointed to a wider problem. This scenario, he concluded, although not the most likely, had a higher probability of occurrence than before and could be catastrophic enough to impact outside the Eurozone. 
Another Board member said that news from Spain revealed that the problems facing its banking industry would be very dif cult to solve, with doubts about portfolios that would only increase in a scenario of protracted recession. This Board member estimated that recognizing this was a rst step for policy makers to take, but hardly suf cient. In his view, this raised important doubts about the economic situation of the Eurozone and the euro itself. 
Some Board members called the attention to the slowdown of some emerging economies. One of them, noted that this revealed the existence of problems or imbalances that were undetected in the expansionary phase of the cycle, but could have important consequences. Another Board member noted that, although the signs of a deceleration in China had continued, the baseline scenario foresaw that Chinese growth would not be so different from the previous forecast (8%), as could be inferred from the smaller adjustment of the copper price in comparison with other commodities. Another Board member warned that, if the slowdown of large emerging economies like Brazil, China, and India continued or deepened, it could hamper the main impulse sustaining the world economy. 
As for domestic activity, several Board members noted that output was growing according to trend. One Board member noted that, maybe like never before, our economy was in what could be called a steady state: closed gaps, full employment, in ation around the target and demand growing near its long- term trend. This contrasted with risks threatening the rest of the world. Other Board member noted that it was dif cult to know whether the deterioration of 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
the external scenario had already caused a domestic slowdown. At any rate, he opined, what mattered was to know how hard its effects would be going forward, a point that was highly uncertain. Several Board members commented on the evolution of the labor market, and pointed out that it had not tightened further. 
One Board member noted that events abroad had had limited effects on the domestic nancial markets and that, despite substantial uctuations, the exchange rate was at a similar level to that of the previous monetary policy meeting, as were the interest rates of risk-free instruments at different maturities. 
All the Board members noted that in ation had been lower than expected and that the in ation outlook had been adjusted downward. However, they also said that the medium-term outlook for this variable had not changed. 
As for the monetary policy decision, all the Board members concurred in that, this time, the only plausible option was to keep the MPR at 5%. 
One Board member called the attention to the fact that both in ation and output remained on their previous trends, with no obvious symptoms of contagion from abroad. However, in this fairly reassuring picture, the trade surplus was narrowing as a result of the strong expansion of domestic demand. While this was not a problem in the present conditions, it could become a relevant factor of economic policy decisions in case of a further deterioration of the international scenario, so it was necessary to do a close follow-up of this variable in the coming months. 
In the opinion of one Board member, background information provided evidence that there were two opposing forces operating in the Chilean economy: on one hand, an external scenario with negative effects; on the other, a domestic demand and a dynamic labor market stimulating output. In recent months the external scenario had been increasing in importance. This Board member concluded that keeping the MPR unchanged this time was the optimal option while waiting to gure out the external developments and their implications on the local economy. 
One Board member estimated that there were several points that could be made in favor of not changing the MPR. For one, the MPR was in the lower zone of a range of neutral values calculated using different methodologies. He estimated that, while it was possible that this range had transitorily shifted downward because of the conditions present in the world economy, by no means was it far from the neutral level. For another, the deterioration already seen and the risks still present in the world economy had to be weighed against the state of 
the domestic cycle and its projected evolution, raising the need for cautious policy making. The main risk was to reverse past decisions hastily, with adverse effects on the markets’ expectations and con dence in monetary policy actions. The same Board member went on to say that, until there was more clarity about the evolution of the internal scenario, the stability of the MPR seemed a good policy option. Nonetheless, he warned, this in no case eliminated the possibility of reacting promptly if conditions changed, especially if they did so abruptly. 
One Board member expressed that, for now, it was convenient for monetary policy to keep a rather neutral position, monitoring external developments very closely. Part of the projected adjustment of the economy, both in terms of output and demand and in credit conditions, were normal within an external scenario of increased uncertainty. In his view, attempting to offset every observed movement with monetary policy could end up introducing more volatility into the economy. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board members Marshall, Claro, and Vial, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 5.0% (annual). 
