MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary Policy Meeting No. 247 held on 15 June 2017. 
Present: Mario Marcel, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member, Rosanna Costa, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Rodrigo Valdés. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Solange Berstein, Financial Operations Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Markets Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Mauricio Alvarez, Chief Counsel of Corporate Legal Services; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Financial Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; María Francisca Pérez, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Carlos Medel, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website.2/ 
Incoming data since the statistical cutoff for the June Monetary Policy Report were broadly consistent with the analysis presented then and, therefore, with the monetary policy orientation proposed therein. 
April's Imacec had posted annual growth of 0.1%, largely in uenced by the effect of three business days less than the previous year and the fall in mining output. Behind this weakness remained the negative performance of investment- 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
dependent productive sectors, compounded by weaker than expected sectors such as trade, which had shown greater dynamism in the previous data. And despitethenegativesurpriseofOtherGDP,theResearchDivisiondidnotbelieve that it should trigger a downward correction to the activity scenario. This, considering the typical volatility of monthly data, especially in the presence of a signi cant difference in the number of working days. Added to this was that the labor market gave no signs of weakening beyond forecasts and that early conjunctural May data showed a recovery from April in some important areas, including car sales, consumer expectations, electric consumptions and some import lines. 
Regarding the expected trajectory for activity, the latest Economic Expectations Survey indicated an expansion of 1.5% for 2017, in line with the Report's estimate, and 2.5% and 3% for 2018 and 2019, respectively. The latter two data pointed to a weaker recovery of growth rates than projected in the baseline scenario. About this, it was important to note that the acceleration of total GDP growth in the last Report's projection owed mainly to a foreseen recovery of natural resources, which in 2018 would grow by 5.5%, in line with the recovery of mining activity. On the contrary, the recovery scenario for Other GDP was very gradual, implying that closing the gaps relevant to in ation would be a slow process, actually, they remained open during the usual projection horizon. This was signi cant, since although an important anchor of the projection scenario was the recovery of activity in the coming years, its velocity in the sectors relevant to in ation —Other GDP— was very moderate. 
Inflation had evolved in line with expectations, albeit with surprises in opposite directions in some products. The most volatile items had been below expectations, which offset a slightly higher core in ation indicator (EFE: excluding foods and energy). In the latter case, the surprises had come from very speci c items, so they did not change the vision of weak in ation going forward. Indeed, in line with the gap remaining in negative territory and a relatively stable real exchange rate, it was projected that EFE in ation would remain low for quite some time. In particular, the Report's forecast estimated that it would be around 2% during most of this year—at 2.1% in December—, to return very slowly to 3%—2.8% at the end of the projection horizon—. Nonetheless, the evolution of non-EFE items would push total in ation closer to 3% during most of the projection horizon. 
It was precisely this scenario of low core in ation and very gradual recovery of Other GDP sectors what called for a more expansionary monetary policy, with below neutral rates for an extended period of time, in line with the Board’s recent decisions and the Report’s working assumptions. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
In this context, the Research Division estimated that, given the proximity of the Report, and the absence of news that could cause a change in the analysis, the only relevant option for this meeting was to keep the rate unchanged and a neutral bias. This, as usual, needed to be monitored in the light of new information becoming known in future meetings. 
2. Monetary policy decision3/ 
All the Board members agreed that after just a few days after the close of the June Report, incoming data con rmed the validity of the macroeconomic scenario depicted in it. 
Regarding the external scenario, several Board members highlighted the monetary policy actions and announcements of the Federal Reserve, in particular, its intention to reduce the size of its balance sheet. In the opinion of one Board member, there seemed to be a divergence between short-term news on in ation and activity in the United States—which were rather weak—and the Fed's more convinced tone about the need to normalize its monetary policy. One Board member noted that although the Fed's announcement had been a surprise, ultimately this had not been re ected in asset prices, partly because it had coincided with a lower than expected US in ation gure, plus a string of marginally negative surprises about US activity. In his view, in the coming months, close follow-up would be needed of its impact on markets and especially capital ows into emerging countries. 
One Board member considered that the Fed's increase in the policy rate showed that they still anticipated a slow but steady recovery of the US economy. Of course, this was subject to considerable uncertainty. One Board member noted that Fed announcements had been received calmly by nancial markets, although there remained a signi cant gap regarding the future path of interest rates expected by the market and the one implicit in the Fed's own projections. Some Board members commented that the calm of the markets following the Fed's announcement, coupled with more positive signals from Europe and the gradual adjustment in China, were indicative of the consolidation of the scenario of greater external impulse implicit in the Report. 
3/ In order to preserve the regulatory individual anonymity in the discussion, all ve Board members are herein referred to as males, including female member Ms. Rosanna Costa. 
One Board member mentioned the weak indicators of domestic output and demand in Colombia and Peru, which had been above average in earlier years, but had suffered some important adjustments in investment in the last year, partly because of the completion of big development projects in mining deposits. 
About the Chilean economy, all ve Board members agreed that April’s Imacec had been signi cantly affected by the month having had fewer working days this year. Still, several Board members noted that, after correcting for such effect, the gure matched the Report’s scenario. One Board member added that other May indicators pointed in the same direction. He also noted that the wage mass had even been more dynamic in the margin, which mattered both because it helped sustain consumption, and because it provided complementary information to monitor the gaps. 
One Board member drew attention to the stability of the wage mass, the weakness of construction and the strengthening of investment in machinery and equipment—other than unconventional transportation—, the favorable credit conditions and the marginal improvement of expectations, although still in negative territory. 
As for in ation, all Board members pointed out that, beyond some speci c factors, the May gures were consistent with the scenario outlined in the Report. One Board member considered that what was most important was to analyze the persistence or volatility of the CPIEFE variation. In this component, the May gure showed a high incidence of tourist packages and condominiums’ shared expenses, which by their volatile nature should not set a trend or anticipate upward pressures. Therefore, the same CPI declining trajectory continued to be projected in the short term, whose trend would begin to change only at the end of this year, to hover around 3% in 2018. 
One Board member noted that, although expectations re ected in asset prices had adjusted marginally downward, they did not deviate signi cantly from 3% in the projection horizon, while the surveys’ responses concentrated in 3%. 
One Board member concluded that a scenario of gradual recovery, marked by the combination of modest growth rates with relatively weak bases of comparison, tended to be con rmed, which would lead to more signi cant— albeit moderate—variations in activity and in ation in the second half of 2017 and in 2018. In this regard, it was important to note that these projections were not the result of a benevolent or overly optimistic view of the Chilean economy, but rather of the more mechanical aspects of the business cycle, where a particularly moderate velocity for Other GDP stood out, with its corresponding 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
implications for the gradual closing of the activity gap. By understanding these characteristics of the medium-term projections, one could also understand the need to maintain an expansionary monetary policy over a prolonged period of time to achieve a sustainable convergence of in ation to its target within the policy horizon. 
One Board member, after concluding that there were no major deviations in the in ation trajectory, stressed that there was always the need for close monitoring and analysis. The expected in ation path had implicit a scenario with a stable exchange rate and a GDP trajectory that, as emphasized in the Report, assumed a stronger recovery of its mining component towards 2018, largely due to the statistical effect of a weak basis of comparison, and also a gradual recovery of Other GDP. Risk elements were always present, both externally and internally, and it was therefore necessary to continue evaluating their evolution and impact. Hence, given the proximity of the Report and in the absence of news that led to a change in the analysis, he agreed with the Research Division that the only relevant option was to keep the policy rate at 2.5%, and voted accordingly. 
In the opinion of one Board member, the main indicators to be monitored were, on the one hand, the evolution of effective core in ation, in particular how it behaved with respect to the short-term internal projection, and whether it stabilized in the coming quarters below or above 2%. Second, the determinants of longer-term in ation, in particular capacity gaps, labor market performance and actual activity growth. Also, the evolution of the real exchange rate, which remained an important element in the determination of short-term in ation. He also believed that, given its recent evolution, it was important to continue to carefully monitor in ation expectations, which had tended to stand below 3%. No background data motivated a different diagnosis from the one proposed in the Report, so the current dosage of monetary stimulus was the right one. 
One Board member noted that new gures were in line with the scenario outlined in the Report, con rming its estimates. He agreed with the Research Division that the only option this time was to keep the policy rate at 2.5%, so he too voted accordingly. 
One Board member commented that in ation had been in line with expectations and consolidated the outlook of low in ation in the coming months and around the target in the medium term. Meanwhile, after Other GDP gures somewhat above forecasts in the rst quarter, April data had been surprisingly low. However, he considered that, because of fewer working days in that month, this data was particularly dif cult to interpret. In the labor market, numbers had stabilized in the last couple of months beyond expectations, but he thought it 
important to emphasize that risks of a faster deceleration remained. Financial conditions were still favorable and interest rates were still low so, in essence, the scenario of gradual recovery towards the end of this year continued to be the most reasonable to base monetary policy upon. In that sense, he concluded, the natural thing to do was to keep the policy rate at 2.5% and the neutral bias of the latest press release. 
One Board member said that the current scenario was consistent with the one foreseen in the Report. Because none of the risks described in it had materialized and there was no indication of a deviation of the price and activity trajectory in the coming months, he agreed that the most obvious option for the MPR at this meeting was to keep it at 2.5%, so he voted for it. He also pointed out that the latest data did not justify abandoning the expected path for the MPR in the coming months, and was therefore in favor of maintaining the current neutral bias. About this, he thought it important to emphasize that changes in the direction of monetary policy would only be justi ed to the extent that the Board identi ed signi cant divergences in the macroeconomic picture that could translate into a different path for in ation in the medium term. Meanwhile, temporary falls in annual in ation, such as those forecast in the Report for June and July, or uctuations in short-term activity indicators, were part of the economy's cyclical transition process, which had already been anticipated in the same Report. Even so, he concluded, the Board should keep a watchful eye for any evidence that rati ed or modi ed the macroeconomic scenario predicted for in ation in the following months. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Claro and Board members Vial, García and Costa to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 2.5%. 
