MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY 
MEETING MonetarypolicymeetingN°199 heldonJune13,2013. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board member; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Present as well: Felipe Larraín, Minister of Finance. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Angel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attester; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Kevin Cowan, Financial Policy Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Francisco Ruiz, Acting Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Claudio Raddatz, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Market Manager; Luis Opazo, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Advisory Department Manager; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Ivonne Vera, Senior Economist; Erika Arraño, Acting Executive Secretary of the Governor’s Cabinet; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
Both the background information as well as the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website 2/. 
2. Options 
On this occasion, with the latest data known after the last meeting, the Research Division presented as relevant options keeping the monetary policy rate (MPR) at 5.0% or lowering it by 25 basis points (bp) to 4.75%. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
On the international front, expected growth rates had fallen, specially due to the weak performance of emerging economies. This had led to a drop in commodity prices. At the same time, international nancial conditions had tightened, particularly those faced by emerging economies, leading to a depreciation of their assets and currencies against the US dollar. 
Locally, indicators suggested a slowdown in economic activity and domestic— not nal— demand, that continued during the second quarter. In May, in ation had been aligned with expectations. The Chilean peso had depreciated against the US dollar and other currencies, as well as in real terms. In addition, surveys showed that a cut in the MPR was expected over the coming months, but not in this Meeting. 
As to the monetary policy decision, the option of lowering the rate could be warranted by expectations of a more intense slowdown in activity and domestic expenditure over the coming quarters, and by a delay in the expected normalization of the in ation rate towards the 3% target. With the information gathered since March, the international outlook for Chile looked somewhat less favorable than foreseen then. This was evidenced by a deceleration in activity of Chile’s trade partners, lower terms of trade and somewhat tighter external nancial conditions. Nonetheless, judging by the high volatility of international nancial markets, this situation was not considered to be consolidated, specially in terms of nancial conditions. 
In Chile, the most recent data were in line with a slowdown of activity and domestic demand. Although this process was occurring somewhat faster than had been anticipated, it was deemed part of a normal convergence towards trend growth and levels of demand and output. Deceleration of activity had been widespread across sectors, except for Mining. As to demand, since the latest Monetary Policy Report, investment had slowed down faster than private consumption. Partial data for the second quarter showed that output continued to grow at lower than expected rates. At the same time, the negative surprise over the performance of nal demand had subdued. Thus, the set of latest available information enabled consideration of a growth scenario lower than had been anticipated in the latest Monetary Policy Report. Although the adjustment in investment could be higher than foreseen, private consumption was still dynamic and its fundamentals solid. Therefore, an abrupt adjustment of demand was unlikely. In any case, the appraisal and conclusions regarding these forecasts were depending on new data that would become available over the next months, as well as on the evolution of the external scenario. 
In ation had been somewhat lower than forecast in March, mainly due to 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
temporary effects of energy prices that would be corrected in subsequent months. Internal projections considered a gradual normalization of in ation towards the target rate, starting from what was judged as a tight situation in the labor market and in domestic capacity. This assessment was still sustained and the scenario was consistent with in ation expectations. However, the appraisal could change, pending on the consolidation of a scenario of lower growth or a delay in the expected correction of in ation. 
Finally, up to that moment, the direction of changes in monetary market interest rates and the exchange rate had been consistent with events, helping the economy to adjust in the face of lower growth and deterioration in terms of trade. In spite of a greater volatility in international markets, local markets showed stable nancial conditions. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
On the international front, all Board members agreed in pointing out the consolidation of the United States recovery process, whereas emerging economies were decelerating. In addition, the United States market was incorporating the possibility of an anticipated gradual withdrawal of the monetary stimulus. In this process, international nancial markets had shown higher volatility, and external nancial conditions for emerging economies had become tighter. Several Board members noted that this, however, was a step towards normalization and thus should be viewed from a positive angle. 
One Board member noted that signs of recovery in the United States inevitably led to changes in asset values and to volatility, because rates of public debt instruments were at a historical low. One Board member stated that the normalization of the monetary stimulus in no way should cut short recovery in the United States. Instead, he considered it was rather a symptom of recovery in that economy. 
Several Board members pointed out that this recovery had effects over emerging economies, whose short-term outlook had changed. One member mentioned that over the last years Chile had bene ted from high export prices, particularly copper, and also from a preferential access to external nancing. Nevertheless, existing signs did not allow concluding that there would be sharp changes, but rather a process of convergence towards patterns closer to historical ones. Those changes, however, had affected asset prices in several emerging countries, putting pressure on stock exchanges, government and corporate bond spreads, as well as appreciating their currencies. Some Board members noted that the rise in risk premiums could be 
harmful for those economies that did not have access to alternative sources of nancing, among which were several Eurozone countries. One member added that the response of the risk premium for Chilean sovereign debt had been mild, and that Chile had access to alternative nancing sources. One Board member felt that it was very important to closely monitor the evolution of capital ows and nancial markets, because the persistence and intensity of this reversal of capital ows would be a key issue in de ning the nancial scenario to be faced by countries like Chile. 
On the domestic front, all Board members agreed in highlighting the slowdown in activity. Some Board members pointed out that this moderation was rather a normalization of previous growth rates and one stressed out that this evolution was desirable. One Board member expressed the view that although the deceleration had been higher than anticipated, only time and new data would con rm whether it re ected transitory or permanent elements. 
Several Board members underlined that as to demand, there was a greater effect on investment than on consumption. One Board member pointed out that part of the deceleration was expected because there had been awareness that the economy was near the end of the investment cycle. One Board member expressed that in any case, the volatility of investment data made it dif cult to clearly assess the speed of deceleration. One Board member noted that adjustment in investment was dissimilar: very intense in Machinery and Equipment, and less so in Construction and Public Investment. According to one Board member’s view, the performance of investment was normal in the decelerating stage of the economic cycle. However, he was surprised by the strength that durable goods consumption continued to show. Some Board members commented that robustness of consumption was a result of positive conditions in the labor market and consumers’ high expectations. In addition, individuals’ indebtedness levels did not pose a restriction on household expenditure. 
Several Board members mentioned that the tight labor market was an element that sustained the dynamism in consumption. Some Board members expressed concern over the growth in real wages and the continued widening of the gap between effective nominal wages and those calculated according to indexation mechanisms, posing increasing challenges in the medium term. In times of convergence of employment towards sustainable rates, this acceleration of real wages was a factor behind the dynamism of consumption that should be closely watched. 
Some Board members mentioned the depreciation of the Chilean peso. According to one Board member, the consolidation of a scenario of lower growth, even below its trend rate, should be accompanied by a change in relative prices, 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
specially the exchange and interest rates. This had already happened to some extent, due mostly to external causes, but it could be intensi ed inasmuch as recent trends in the domestic economy persist. 
All Board members remarked on the low inflation measures, although emphasizing the expected convergence to the target during subsequent months. They also highlighted that in ation expectations over a two-year term remained around 3%. 
Regarding the monetary policy decision, all Board members agreed that, in light of available data, the best decision was to keep the MPR at 5.0%. 
One Board member noted that information needed to assess the speed of growth adjustment was still ambiguous, and therefore it was necessary that policy decision making be cautious. Nonetheless, he felt that the conditions behind keeping interest rates higher than in similar countries, had eased. In his view, there were elements that could explain either maintaining the MPR unchanged as well as lowering it by 25 bp. He then went on to indicate that the risk of being late in lowering it was not felt as being too high. Although there was still uncertainty as to the speed of deceleration, it seemed that it was occurring gradually in different components of demand, making it worthwhile to wait. On the other hand, a cut in the rate would signal that deceleration had consolidated beyond a doubt, something which was not so evident. Nevertheless, he continued, inasmuch as these patterns became consolidated, a change in the MPR would be justi ed in upcoming Meetings. 
A Board member noted that the MPR remained at levels that were relatively high when compared to those of developed countries. With growth and long- term rate differentials that started to close, it seemed reasonable to consider the option of starting to adjust the MPR. The key question was when to initiate this process. The option to maintain the rate would allow additional information to be gathered and then to proceed based on more solid bases if the trends were con rmed. It also had the advantage of giving the market more time to assimilate the suggested changes. If the option to lowering the MPR was chosen at this Meeting, there was some risk that the market would not correctly digest this decision, because it mostly expected the rate to be kept at the same level. As the Monetary Policy Report was to be released within a few weeks, it would allow disseminating a more thorough view of the evolution of the economy and the direction of monetary policy. Before ending his remarks, he expressed that a reduction in the MPR would ease the adjustment required by the economy, as long as it was not followed by additional stimuli arising from actions in other macroeconomic policy fronts. 
A Board member remembered that over the last months there had been a policy puzzle. On the external front there were pressures to lower the MPR, as interest rate differentials created pressure on capital ows and specially on the exchange rate. On the other hand, he continued, domestic indicators pointed at raising the MPR, given the tight conditions in the labor market. Thus, the fact that in ation measures had been uncommonly low was reassuring and allowed postponing the puzzle of making a choice between those options. During the last month, however, tensions on monetary policy had eased on both fronts. On one hand, external interest rates had risen and the peso had depreciated. On the other, although the labor market remained tight, activity had slowed down. Nonetheless, he continued, looking at the future and because it was riskier to face current account de cits in light of the likely direction of the international scenario, the best situation would be to combine a deceleration in expenditure with a drop in interest rates and an easing of the current account de cit. Speci cally, an appropriate indicator was the path of the exchange rate. In that direction, he argued, further close monitoring of the evolution of aggregate expenditure, both public and private, was needed in order to determine the opportunity and pace of future monetary policy actions. 
A Board member noted that it was natural to express doubts as to how permanent were the surprises that had recently sprung up. There were still some elements headed in the opposite direction of deceleration, such as tight conditions in the labor market. Therefore, it was wise to wait for more information. As in previous occasions, he stressed out the high level of Chile’s MPR in relation to those of similar countries. Overall, the options presented by the Research Division were the most reasonable ones. Lowering the rate by 25bp was consistent with a sharper than expected slowdown, with low actual and expected in ation, and with a chance that this deceleration were to consolidate. Keeping the rate unchanged was more in line with a premature diagnosis that contained elements of a possibly transitory nature, with in ation gradually returning to 3%, with a tight labor market and with consumption which, albeit having slowed down, was still growing at high rates. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board members Marshall, Claro and Vial, to maintain the monetary policy rate at 5.0% (annual). 
