MINUTES OF THE 
MONETARY POLICY MEETING The monetary policy session N°183 was held on March 15, 2012. 
Present, Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board member; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Also Present, Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Kevin Cowan, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Claudio Raddatz, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Market Manager; Luis Álvarez Consultant Manager of Communications; Enrique Orellana, Monetary Policy Strategy and Communication Manager; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General; 
1. Background 
1.1 Brie ng 
Both the background information and the presentation by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s web site1/. 
1.2 Background analysis and comments 
The discussion centered on the behavior of output and the labor market in the United States. It was noted that the drop in the unemployment rate could be partly attributed to a reduced labor force—the discouraged unemployed—and partly to an increase in the creation of jobs. About the latter, it was pointed out that such increase was minor, considering the number of jobs destroyed during the crisis. It was noted that the U.S. was still dealing with signi cant macroeconomic imbalances, in particular regarding scal equilibrium and the balance of payments. Therefore, the argument went, resolving the imbalances called for major productivity improvements, which would imply economic growth that would not be fully re ected on employment. 
There was debate about the recent trends of domestic demand and output indicators, particularly whether they re ected a deceleration or acceleration of the economy. Divergences could be observed across sectors: while some were growing stronger (e.g., construction), others showed no signi cant change (e.g., manufacturing). About expenditure indicators, it was pointed out that the y-o-y expansion rates of consumption and imports were declining or slowing, but, at any rate, the effects of the external developments had been milder than expected. 
2. Options 
Information gathered since the last meeting led to propose as the only possible option to maintain the monetary policy interest rate (MPR) at 5.0%. 
The December 2011 Monetary Policy Report depicted an external scenario characterized by slow growth of developed economies, persisting international nancial stress and lower terms of trade for Chile with respect to 2011. In addition, it assumed that the balance of risks was negative, due to the possibility of a worsening of the Eurozone crisis. 
The advances in normalizing the sovereign and banking debt markets in the Eurozone had reduced the risks of a deeper recession in the region. This con gured a somewhat more benign external scenario, and more limited negative risks. Although the growth forecasts of trading partners practically had not changed since December, both the terms of trade and the international nancing conditions were more favorable than previously estimated. However, important doubts persisted about the sustainability of this improvement in the Eurozone. In this context, sudden changes in expectations and new rounds of turbulences in global nancial markets could not be ruled out. Meanwhile, 
1/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
other risks had gained importance. In particular, the possibility of a sharper slowdown of China’s economy and the higher geopolitical risks associated to Iran and their effects on the oil market. 
In Chile, expenditure indicators had shown a deceleration during the second half of2011,althoughslowerthanexpected.Output,onthecontrary,showedamarked deceleration in the third quarter but picked up by year’s end, also accompanied by more optimism among consumers and businesses. Some indicators related to private consumption were consistent with further moderation of growth, but this trend was not yet consolidated. The Monetary Policy Report’s baseline scenario assumed that the slowdown of demand and output would deepen during the rst half of 2012, as a consequence of the impact of the external scenario. However, in light of latest developments, the intensity of these effects had not only been milder, but would continue to be so in the months to come. 
About in ation, its recent trajectory re ected a few surprises in the prices of perishable foods, which, coupled with the recent increase in fuel prices, could add temporary upward pressures in the coming months. As in other episodes of supply shocks, short-term in ation expectations had risen. There was also the need to pay special attention to the faster increase in core in ation indicators, which tended to be more inertial and could be responding to a more intense use of resources in the economy—particularly in the labor market—than had been assumed in the Monetary Policy Report. 
In recent months, the option to cut the MPR had been warranted as a preventive measure facing the foreseen deterioration of the external scenario and its consequences in Chile. Considering that the external scenario was perceived as somewhat better and its negative risks were thought to be more limited, on this occasion this option had less justi cation. The more so because risks for domestic in ation had increased, which led to rule out the option to reduce the MPR this time. 
Alternatively, with respect to raising the MPR, there were still important doubts about the sustainability of the increased optimism of international nancial markets, which, on this occasion, led to disregard such option. 
The option of keeping the MPR at was valid since its current level was within a range of normal values for it, providing exibility to wait and gather information on the behavior of external conditions, the strength of the Chilean economy and the state of core in ationary pressures. This combined with private expectations not projecting any signi cant increases in the MPR for either the short or the medium term. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
All five Board members underscored the improvement in confidence at international nancial markets and coincided in that, for the moment, the probability of worst-case scenarios occurring had decreased. Among news coming from the Eurozone, they highlighted the liquidity injected by the European Central Bank, and the Greek debt swap. Several Board members noted that, in any case, the situation of the Eurozone was still complex and not free of risks. Structural problems remained, so there was still a long way ahead and new tensions could appear in the markets as the year went on. 
Several Board members noted that despite improvements in nancial markets, no changes could yet be seen in global growth expectations. This, in the opinion of one Board member, could be explained by the usual lags that output gures take to capture changes in perceptions and prospects. One Board member, noted that in the U.S., the growth in output from its trough had not been accompanied by an increase in employment proportional to recoveries from previous recessions in that economy. In contrast, productivity had risen, which in his view was a necessary condition for a sustainable recovery. 
Domestically, all the Board members noted that domestic demand and output had exceeded expectations. As for output, some Board members pointed out that their pace of expansion was converging to trend rates. Several Board members noted that this had resulted in the closure of output gaps, while one Board member estimated them to be more open than had been forecast in December’s Monetary Policy Report. 
One Board member stated that the improvement of external conditions faced by Chile had helped maintain the dynamism of its economy beyond previous estimates. Several Board members said there were signs of nancial conditions being tighter than a few months before, which could suggest an additional moderation of credit and domestic demand. In the opinion of one Board member, the evolution of credit aggregates signaled some degree of caution both on the supply side and on the demand side, which could be attributed to the prevalence of unresolved risks and, in the particular case of consumer loans, to the regulatory uncertainty that hangs over these operations. 
Concerning domestic demand, one Board member stated that in his view there was no evidence that the expected deceleration would be sustained over time. While y-o-y gures posted a decline, it was also important to analyze gures in the margin. Private consumption had actually shown a slowdown in terms of velocity, seemingly explained by an even greater deceleration in the consumption 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
of durables. Gross xed capital formation had been high and everything suggested it would stay high. Public expenditure, although complying with the established budget, had accelerated towards year’s end. 
Several Board members indicated that the labor market continued in a tight situation. One Board member noted that the stronger job creation had taken place in the services sectors. In construction, meanwhile, employment gures still did not show the increased activity in the sector. The greater labor demand had re ected in wage developments, which had to continue to be monitored with special care. Real unit labor costs had gone back to levels that were nothing to worry about, but if they continued on the same trend, they risked generating a problem of wage in ation sooner rather than later. 
All ve Board members showed concern about prospects for in ation and called attention to the rebound of several core in ation measures. They also noted the higher expectations for short-term in ation. Nonetheless, they also coincided in that the risks from abroad were still substantial. 
Several Board members argued that recently a new risk factor had come to the scene: the increase in the oil price. Some Board members pointed out that with closed or even slightly open output gaps, potential supply shocks could have second-round effects that would be more complicated to handle. One Board member said that in that sense, those coming from the fruits & vegetables or fuel prices would have to be followed up closely so they would not generate second-round effects or changes in expectations. 
One Board member said that if the closing of gaps was compounded with headline and core in ation measures sloping up and with the increase in in ation expectations one year ahead, one could safely say that the preoccupation about in ation prospects had increased. He also said that a few months back projections were that the prices would remain contained by the growth slowdown that would result in a very deteriorated external situation and the high risks prevailing. Now, he said, the effects of such situation had proven to be smaller than expected and new elements had arisen, such as the higher oil price, so the in ation outlook was now more complex. 
With respect to the monetary policy decision, all the Board members coincided in that on this occasion it was dif cult to envision a different option than holding the rate at 5%. Several Board members noted that a change in the risk balance had occurred. 
In the opinion of one Board member the most sensible option this time was holding the MPR, while keeping a “wait and see” attitude. He estimated that the conditions were not ripe to change this message because the deviations were still small and interest rates were at a normal level, so it was possible to wait for clearer signs of an acceleration of domestic demand. Still, he warned, short of a sharper collapse in Europe, in the near future there would have to be a bias toward more contractionary monetary policy. 
One Board member opined that incoming information tended to moderate the risk balance toward neutrality. He estimated that the possibility of continuing to gradually adjust the MPR downward that was perceived a short while ago seemed easy to overrule at that moment and, for now, the prudent thing to do was to keep the MPR where it was, and communicate a neutral bias. 
One Board member stated that in earlier months the outlook was that in ation would converge to the target fairly rapidly as a result of the slowdown in domestic activity. This outlook was enhanced with the downward bias of the risk balance. But the outlook, including the risk balance, had changed because, rst, output was evolving above projections in a context of narrow gaps. Second, supply-side factors had arisen that could affect the in ation trajectory, such as the oil price trend and the potential effects of the drought on food prices. Third, the convergence of in ation to the target could take longer than forecast, which entailed the risk of affecting expectations and generating a dynamic that called for a monetary policy response to rein it in. These factors resulted in that, in his view, the idea of an interest rate cut had to be discarded altogether. He added that, in any case, the MPR stood at a neutral level, providing the necessary space to wait and see. 
One Board member estimated that lowering the MPR this time con icted with the emerging in ationary risk. At the same time, raising it was inconsistent with the risks that persisted in the international scenario. Although the effects of the situation abroad had been milder than expected, it was still likely that the deceleration of consumption indicators—particularly of durables—, loans and some sectors, would deepen in the coming months, although not as severely as was thought a few months back. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided to hold the monetary policy rate at 5.0%. Voting for this action: Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board Members Marshall, Claro and Vial. 
