MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary Policy Meeting No. 244, held on 16 March 2017. 
Present: Mario Marcel, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member; Rosanna Costa, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Rodrigo Valdés. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Gabriel Aparici, interim Financial Policy Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior economist; Carlos Medel, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background minutes and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
The data made available during the month, together with early analyses in preparation of the March Monetary Policy Report, suggested that the trends outlined at the February Meeting had not changed and validated the general orientation of monetary policy. This meant completing the expansion of the monetary impulse in the short term and, absent any surprises, take a pause 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
to assess its effects. Anyway, the preliminary analysis of the Report indicated that there was high probability that the monetary impulse necessary to ensure in ation’s convergence to the target would be somewhat bigger than estimated in December. 
The recovery of the external impulse had consolidated further, with good activity indicators especially in the manufacturing sector, improved expectations, a normalized global in ation, better nancial conditions for emerging economies than had been foreseen in December, and more favorable terms of trade. All these elements should help to regain stronger growth rates in the coming quarters. 
Domestically, the new national accounts gures had con rmed a weak economy and showed an even sharper slowdown towards the end of 2016, which the Research Division believed would continue into the rst part of 2017 and drive a downward revision to the growth outlook of Other GDP (GDP excluding natural resources) for this year, as the negative surprises had come from usually more persistent sectors, such as construction and entrepreneurial services. Besides, the Escondida Mine downtime would have a non-negligible negative effect on the year’s growth, but due to mining’s own nature its effects on forecast in ation and the MPR trajectory would e bounded. In ation had brought no surprises in February. 
In this context, the options proposed by the Research Division at this Meeting were to lower the monetary policy rate (MPR) either by 25 basis points (bp), taking it to 3%, or by 50bp, to 2.75%. 
Cutting the MPR by 25bp cut had the advantage that it was consistent with what the large majority of the market expected, so possible communicational problems were minimized. This was particularly important because the Report was only a couple of weeks away. Moreover, if after completing the Report the Board thought it appropriate to increase the monetary impulse, this decision would be consistent with that. 
Lowering it by 50bp was also consistent with the updated outlook and the idea of completing the increase in the monetary impulse promptly. However, the downside was that it could be misconstrued as a change in the Bank’s view of the economy and that a stronger monetary impulse was necessary than was suggested by the analysis. This could allow for changes in the prospects of policy actions that could be contradicted in the March Report. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
2. Monetary policy decision3/ 
About conditions abroad, several Board members noted that they were improving, with more robust growth in developed economies and a gradual rise in in ation. One Board member mentioned the stabilizing nancial outlook in China, which provided a somewhat stronger real support to its demand for emerging economies’ exports. Several Board members noted that the monetary policy normalization process in the US was unfolding gradually and had caused no disruption in nancial markets, so favorable nancial conditions remained. Some Board members stressed the positive impact of these developments on commodity prices. One Board member noted that this improved external scenario, which he thought was exposed to signi cant political and nancial risks, would gain momentum for the Chilean economy only during the second half of the year. One Board member noted that one could not ignore the risks inherent to a gradual withdrawal of the monetary impulse in the US, together with other perils of economic nature and underlying policies. In particular, the depth of scal, tax-related, and protectionist measures in the US and political de nitions in Europe, and their impact on markets’ volatility. 
Several Board members referred to the new national accounts gures, noting that, although pointing to 2016 growth being in line with expectations in the December Report, they revealed a further weakening towards year’s end, especially of investment lines. One Board member emphasized that the economy was unable to complete the reversal of the sustained declines in investment, weakening the potential for growth. He noted that the recent gures widened the activity gap, while the evolution of the labor market pointed to an increase in capacity gaps. Its gradual deterioration, manifested in the composition of employment, had allowed a wage adjustment that had favored greater stability in household income. Some Board members said that even though the strike at the Escondida Mine would lower rst quarter growth, it was a transitory supply shock and it would not affect the in ation outlook or the medium term growth trend. 
One Board member recalled that in the previous Meeting they had discussed at length whether the scenario of further deceleration of late last year, which had continued into the rst quarter of this year, would still be valid with incoming gures and the closing of the national accounts. In his view, no new gure contradicted such evaluation, so he expected capacity gaps to widen further during the rst half of this year, consistently with slower growth in Other GDP. 
3/ In order to preserve the regulatory individual anonymity in the discussion, all ve Board members are herein referred to as males, including female member Ms Rosanna Costa. 
One Board member highlighted the dif culties of interpreting recent information. On one hand, he noted the change in composition for the last quarter of 2016 that the new national accounts gures had revealed: somewhat stronger consumption of non-durable goods and services, offset by a sharp slowdown in government consumption. He added that this was important because the former was the biggest and most persistent component of aggregate demand, while the adjustment of government consumption possibly responded to improved allocation of public spending throughout the year. On the other hand, he also drew attention to the abrupt fall in xed capital investments at the close of 2016, noting that it was dif cult to gure out what explained such fall and to what extent it set the trend into the future, because there was information pointing to different conclusions, such as the recent evolution of capital goods imports and the domestic stock market. The Research Division had made a good case for making a material downward correction to the Other GDP forecast, especially for the rst quarter. However, this had not shown up yet in consumption indicators and it seemed convenient to remember that investment is the most volatile and dif cult to project component of aggregate demand. Therefore, he believed that before adopting a de nitely more pessimistic vision for 2017 activity, more information was worth waiting for. 
One Board member said that the biggest news since the last Meeting was the important revision to the growth forecast for 2017 associated both with the fall in mining output and with the poor performance of the last part of 2016 and early 2017. This effect conditioned growth for the year, although the speed of the recovery of the next few quarters had not been altered as yet. 
About in ation, several Board members noted it had evolved as estimated in December. One Board member said that, if anything, incoming information tended to shorten the temporary deviations from the target, which, given the Bank’s mandate, was a rst-order element for the decision that was to be made at the moment. 
One Board member pointed out that the factors underlying the in ationary trajectory had changed. The moderation of the exchange rate had coupled with not-so-dynamic activity and domestic demand. Prospects for the coming months indicated that this could deepen as a result of weak investment and a reduced capacity of consumption for sustaining demand. The latest employment data revealed a worsening of the labor market in its various dimensions. Thus, the activity gap would open up because the behavior of demand components and sectors would not be easily reversed, increasing their incidence in the behavior of in ation. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member highlighted two elements he thought were relevant. On one hand, he considered it important to delimit the meaning of the phrase “wait and see the effect of the monetary policy measures before acting.” According to him, the right way to interpret this was watching whether the monetary policy pass-through to the nancial market was indeed operating. This could be done with one or two months delay. On the other hand, he thought it was incorrect to interpret this as taking some time off to see the nal effect on the macroeconomy and the evolution of in ation, because that would happen with a lag of several quarters. For this reason, he concluded, a decision had to be made now, not waiting for more information, since the market widely expected a reduction of the MPR and it was already affecting the nancial markets. He also drew attention to the fact that nancial conditions were somewhat tighter, in particular considering the average interest rates of commercial loans and their volumes. 
Turning to the monetary policy decision, one Board member (RC) considered that the option to lower the MPR by 25bp was consistent with the previous baseline scenario, but also with a more adverse one, where the weakness of the fourth quarter could continue. Not being certain of the resulting wider gaps, and not having completed the analysis for the Monetary Policy Report that could fully validate them, but con rming that even in that scenario that policy choice was perfectly compatible, he was for cutting 25pp off the MPR. The alternative option re ected a stronger reaction that would surprise the market, because it would re ect an important-enough change in the Bank’s perception so as to speed up the pace of MPR reductions. In general, he concluded, it is right to take the market by surprise only when there is a sense of urgency, and he thought that was not the case right then. 
One Board member said that both options seemed appropriate to him. He believed it was important to separate the analysis in two dimensions: (i) De ne the size of the current monetary stimulus, and (ii) estimate the monetary stimulus required. About the former, in his view, the current monetary stimulus was clearly lower than the one implicit towards August of last year. At that moment in ation was higher and the capacity gap lower, and as such it was evident that stimulus had to be increased. The relevant question, then, was the second: by how much had the MPR to be reduced. The key argument to put some order into this assessment were the preliminary projections of the March Report indicating that the economy was literally on the brink of a cyclical rebound, owing largely to the external scenario. In his opinion, this was a speculative diagnosis. On the contrary, there had been bad news: wider gaps and disin ationary pressures for which there was no evidence of reversal. Therefore, it was dif cult to determine how far down the MPR had to go, so the wise thing to do was to lower it by 
25bp and continue to evaluate its proper path in the coming months. It did not seem to him that there was certainty that 2.75% was the nish line based on a future rebound and in that the economy would go from less to more. Thus he preferred to lower the MPR by 25bp, since the main problem of the 50bp cut was that it was not expected by the market and it would be a quite signi cant pre-judging of what would be said in the Report. 
One Board member drew attention to the peculiar circumstances of this Meeting. There were signi cant dif culties to interpret the available information, because of the combination of important surprises in activity and demand data of recent months and the incorporation of the new national accounts information that had yet to show up in the more conjunctural gures. Furthermore, the March Report’s discussion was just beginning and one had to be careful not to let the message from this Meeting contradict what would be disclosed in a few weeks’ time. In this context, it seemed reasonable to him to wait a little longer before adjusting the MPR, which was fully consistent with the December Report’s message, which, with the data available to date, was still in force. However, he thought it most appropriate to lower the MPR by 25bp, both because it was consistent with the December Report’s scenario and because this action wouldn’t take the market by surprise. He concluded by stating that it seemed highly inconvenient to propose lowering the MPR by 50bp. No one expected it this time around, and although many agents expected an action of this kind, they saw it as transitory and occurring much later in the year. 
One Board member noted that the market’s estimates and the Bank’s own projections suggested that further monetary stimulus was needed, which in his opinion was con rmed by the data. He added that the monetary policy outlook rested on two pillars. One, that both the market’s and the Bank’s projections assumed a gradual recovery of the economy towards the end of 2017. Although the prospects for the rst part of this year had worsened substantially, external conditions had become more favorable, domestic nancial conditions were loose and there were no signi cant imbalances in the Chilean economy, which justi ed the vision of the economy growing closer to trend GDP towards 2018. In his view, asset prices might be re ecting this vision. It seemed unreasonable to him to work with a baseline scenario where the recovery was long postponed, which would inevitably lead to deepen the discussion of potential growth that presented dif culties at that point. In other words, equating the absence of a recovery only to a demand shock, with the in ation outlook then in effect, could lead to a misinterpretation of a mechanical relationship between monetary policy and activity. Two, a second important consideration was the trajectory of the real exchange rate, which was still important in the short-run dynamics of in ation. The projections assumed a marginal depreciation of the peso in real 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
terms, consistent with the scenario of slow growth and interest rate differentials with the US. The opposite scenario, where the peso appreciated further and in ation took longer to reach 3%, could also be signaling a somewhat more positive recovery scenario. 
One Board member (MM) said that there were two important benchmarks at this Meeting. On the one hand, the communication of the previous Meeting, stating that “in the most likely scenario, it will be necessary to boost the monetary impulse over the short term.” On the other, the upcoming March Report, which was in preparation. The decision to be made had to ensure consistency between the two elements, unless the trajectory of the economy, and of in ation in particular, would deviate signi cantly from forecasts, which would require thorough explanation. In his view, the justi cation for a more expansionary monetary policy had strengthened and he saw no reason for postponing a further MPR cut. He thought the most appropriate option was to lower the rate by 25bp, giving the opportunity for the next Report to provide a more solid basis for additional adjustments. Nonetheless, it appeared that the available evidence indicated quite clearly that the current monetary impulse could still be insuf cient, an issue that should be communicated to the market in order to avoid temporary incoherence among the Board’s messages. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Claro and Board members Vial, García and Costa to lower the monetary policy rate by 25 basis points, to 3%. 
