MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY 
MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 208 held on 13 March 2014. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Enrique Marshall, Vice-Governor; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member, Pablo García, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Alberto Arenas. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Pablo Mattar, acting General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Kevin Cowan, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, acting Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Claudio Raddatz, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Advisory Department Manager; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Erika Arraño, Executive Secretary to the Governor’s Cabinet; Ivonne Vera, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
2. Options 
Based on the data known after the last meeting, the Research Division presented as relevant options keeping the monetary policy rate (MPR) at 4.25% or lowering it by 25 basis points, to 4.0%. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
The international outlook had not changed signi cantly from the previous meeting, except for increased concern about the evolution of China’s growth, because of its negative effects on the copper price. Other indicators con rmed the gradual recovery of growth in developed economies and the gradual withdrawal of the monetary stimulus by the U.S. Federal Reserve. 
Domestic gures con rmed that output and nal demand were growing less than foreseen in the last Monetary Policy Report. The negative surprises of the last month had been linked to mining production and investment-related sectors. At the same time, there were symptoms of a slowdown in consumption, especially the durable component, which was consistent with a less dynamic behavior of its fundamentals and a decline in consumer con dence indexes. During the next weeks the Report’s projections would be reviewed, but the information at hand at the time pointed to a downward correction to projected 2014 growth and, accordingly, a lower degree of domestic resources utilization. The unemployment rate, however, was still low by historic standards. 
February ́s in ation had exceeded expectations, a surprise that re ected mainly the impact of the peso depreciation and the increase in fuel prices. In addition, the higher prices of foodstuffs and the recent depreciation of the currency had triggered an upward revision to the in ation forecast for the coming months. However, greater capacity gaps could take some steam off medium-term in ationary pressures and cushion the pass-through of recent shocks. Thus, despite recent surprises, expectations at the relevant horizon for monetary policy remained around 3% annually. 
The option of keeping the MPR unchanged could be justi ed by the fact that it had already been lowered by 75 basis points in the recent months, domestic credit continued to ow normally to households and enterprises, short- and long-term interest rates had declined and the peso had depreciated in real terms below its historical averages. At the same time, in ation was close to 3%. Keeping the policy rate unchanged without ruling out the possibility of changing it going forward, bought some time to gather more information on the true evolution of the economy, the effect of the cuts already made and the in ationary impact of recent shocks. It had to be noted, however, that this decision would take the market by surprise, because expectations were largely of a reduction in the MPR this time around, so it could modify the perception on the future path of monetary policy. 
The option of lowering the MPR was consistent with the notion that the negative surprise in output and demand could last longer, while the recent in ationary surprise was temporary. This could call for additional monetary impulse as 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
compared with the December projection, in order to make sure that in ation would remain around the target over the policy horizon. However, this would depend on the actual behavior of in ation and the assessment of the medium- term in ation outlook. Although the recent evolution of in ation was consistent with a normal and transitory adjustment to the depreciation of the peso, it was important to watch that the second-round effects on other prices, nominal wages and expectations, remain bounded and aligned with the target. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
On the global economy, all the Board members stressed that developed economies were undergoing a gradual recovery process and their prospects had improved in recent months, while the outlook for emerging markets had deteriorated further. News from China had con rmed the vulnerabilities of its nancial system, but the most attention was focused on the impact this was having on commodity prices, particularly copper, and thus on the terms of trade in the emerging world. One Board member noted that while it was uncertain whether this adjustment would be temporary or permanent, it seemed that prices were moving toward their long-term trends. He also stressed that, despite increased concerns about China in recent months, the Chinese growth outlook had not changed much. 
Regarding the increased risks in the emerging world, one Board member added that the crisis in Ukraine had added an unexpected event, in a particularly sensitive region because of its geopolitical implications and possible impact on the energy and food markets. He noted that the Latin American economies were facing a new challenge, especially for monetary policy, as that their currencies were depreciating, in ation was rising and the current account de cits were relatively high. 
About the domestic front, all the Board members noted the surprising behavior of output and in ation. One Board member stressed that the low output gure con rmed the view that the slowdown had been sharper than expected, suggesting that the economy was moving toward lower growth rates than previously thought. However, he said, other evidence, such as the state of the labor market, some credit indicators and some series of expectations, were still in a normality range and the economy was generally operating near full capacity. All in all, he ended, the key element was that the reduced output expectations should allow for a reduction in in ationary pressures. 
Some Board members noted that the surprise in February’s in ation re ected the effects of the peso depreciation and the resulting pressures that were building up on margins. They added that the rise in the real exchange rate over the past few months had been substantial and, insofar it had a signi cant permanent component, it could push annual in ation temporarily to the upper zone of the target range. Overall, they concluded, given the magnitude of the observed exchange rate adjustment, its effects and implications had to be examined with special attention. 
One Board member noted that the consolidation of a scenario of slower growth and higher in ation could be seen as a monetary policy dilemma. However, he added, he thought it unlikely. On the one hand, there were elements that hinted a recovery, albeit moderate, of activity in the second half of the year, including more expansionary scal and monetary policies, the low basis of comparison, the recovery of the U.S. economy and a real exchange rate that, although with lags, should incentivize the tradable sector. On the other hand, in a scenario of bigger output gaps it was reasonable to expect lower in ationary pressures. This combined with especially low in ation in the developed world. In any case, it was clear that the risks had increased in both dimensions. A further deterioration of conditions in China or a lower than expected rise in investment could slow down the domestic recovery process, leading to larger gaps and lower in ationary pressures, with the implication of a more expansionary monetary policy. Moreover, in terms of in ation the main risks were of second-round effects from the peso depreciation, which was something that had to be examined on a permanent basis to avoid surprises. 
All ve Board members stressed out the peso depreciation. One Board member referred to the factor causing the peso to lose more value than other currencies. He noted that, on the one hand, the depreciation of the past months had coincided with stable and declining domestic interest rates, an adjustment that was partly induced by the recent monetary policy decisions which attested to the strength of the policy framework in place in Chile. On the other hand, this Board member continued, part of this depreciation had to do with changes in external rates and risk premiums. However, most recently, this latter element had not been present, suggesting that real factors, including the drop in the copper price, were behind the exchange rate trajectory. Thus, and still with some possible degree of exchange rate over-reaction, he believed that the vision had consolidated that a more permanent adjustment of the real exchange rate was required. 
One Board member noted that, with regard to the changes in the macroeconomic scenario, one could expect that the Central Bank would act so as to preserve 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
price stability under the in ation targeting regime. In that sense, reduced growth prospects were consistent with a real depreciation of the peso and expectations of further monetary easing. In his view, the reason why in ation expectations remained around the target was precisely because the lower medium-term in ationary pressures due to economic slack would be offset by the effects of the weakening of the peso. Therefore, he thought it noteworthy that private expectations and the money market had evolved in this direction, unlike many other emerging economies that, for various reasons, could not match up the depreciation of their currencies with lower interest rates. 
Turning to the monetary policy decision, several Board members coincided that the option of lowering the MPR clearly dominated over the other. One Board member noted that, in his view, the sole option at this meeting was to cut 25 basis points off the MPR. One Board member said that the two options were valid and carried risks. Keeping the MPR unchanged to wait for new evidence had the risk of arriving too late to prevent an undesired deceleration. Lowering it could trigger new depreciations that might affect in ation expectations over the relevant monetary policy horizon. 
About future changes to the MPR, a Board member said that it would be necessary to weigh quantitatively the size and price effects of the excess capacity that was being generated, as well as exchange rate movements. In particular, it was important to monitor the conditions and characteristics of a potential cyclical upturn towards the second half of this year, which would be crucial in limiting the size of the gaps and to have a proper diagnosis of the persistence of the recent in ation numbers. He concluded that although, in his opinion, it would probably be necessary to reduce the MPR further, it was premature to prejudge the magnitude and timing of such actions. 
One Board member noted that further reductions of the MPR could not be ruled out, but the information at hand and reasonable prudence recommended signaling some stability in the interest rate trajectory, emphasizing that future movements, without discarding further adjustments, would depend on macroeconomic conditions as they unfolded. 
One Board member felt that the further actions would require careful evaluation. The tension between gures of weak output and higher in ation could pose complex dilemmas, requiring prudence and good communication of the diagnosis that were behind the Bank’s decisions. In his view, with the new cut, the MPR was on a reasonable level given the prevailing conditions and facilitated decision making. This, because it diminished the urgency and allowed to properly temper policy actions. 
One Board member noted that, both because of the present risks and because the MPR has already been lowered by 100 basis points over the last six months, the options for the conduct of monetary policy should be opened up. Thus, although he could not rule out that more expansionary monetary policy could be necessary, it was also true that the Board might need more time to assess the effects on the in ation outlook of both its own decisions and other developments. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marshall, and Board members Claro, Vial and García, to lower the annual monetary policy rate by 25 basis points to 4.0%. 
4 
