MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 220, held on 19 March 2015. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Enrique Marshall, Vice-Governor; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Alberto Arenas. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Elías Albagli, Economic Analysis and Modeling Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Gloria Peña, Macroeconomic Statistics Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
On the external front, since the last meeting expansionary monetary policy movements had continued across the world, intensifying the increase in global liquidity. In this scenario, the main news was the recent statement by the Federal Reserve, which, while leaving the door open to begin raising the policy rate, stood out for its more cautious approach. This would help to maintain more comfortable nancial conditions and, in that sense, it was positive. However, it was not free of risks, since the term and risk premiums seemed to be particularly 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
compressed, a situation that could suffer abrupt reversals, causing sudden changes in asset prices and currencies around the world. The high sensitivity that exchange rates, nancial asset prices, and even commodity prices had shown to news coming from the US economy, indicated that this was no minor risk. In any case, the Fed’s cautious tone somehow limited the aforementioned risk. 
Latin America continued to be the exception to this monetary ease, as in ation had tended to rise in tandem with signi cant currency depreciations. This had con gured a scenario that seemed to have no room for interest rate cuts, despite continuous downward revisions to the growth forecast. 
During the month there had also been signi cant changes in the prices of oil and copper. With respect to the last meeting, oil had fallen by nearly 10%, while copper had risen more than 2%. These movements, which appeared to be related to market-speci c elements, occurred amid high volatility, making it dif cult to assess their persistence. 
Incoming data and the analysis leading to March’s Monetary Policy Report suggested that the external impulse would be moderate, but stronger than in 2014. It also indicated that the risks leaned toward reduced output, and a number of them were associated with substantial depreciations of the peso. 
Domestically, nal 2014 national accounts and conjunctural data depicted a very similar scenario to the one foreseen in the December Report, namely limited strength in output and demand. Nor did local and external risks show big changes with respect to past meetings. The unemployment rate continued at record lows, re ecting that the labor market was still considerably strong. Although these gures seemed discordant with the state of the business cycle, some structural factors—such as the lower youth participation in the labor force and the higher participation of older age brackets—could explain in part why the unemployment rate was so much below its historical averages. Furthermore, while job creation had not changed signi cantly in recent months, more cyclical sectors were destroying jobs, or were at least not creating them. In addition, many the new jobs were more precarious in nature. Anyway, nominal wages continued to grow strongly, a phenomenon that, according to the Research Division, had to do more with indexation and high in ation, than with an increase in pressures in the labor market. 
As for prices, the developments of the last month continued to re ect high in ation, higher than forecast in the December Report, which would remain above 4% for longer than projected then. In February, in ation had matched the internal projection, but again had exceeded the expectations of market 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
agents who, after knowing the actual gure, had adjusted their in ation outlook upward, coming closer to the internal projection. 
Market expectations continued to hover around 3%, despite the string of surprises, the persistent depreciation of the peso and the fact that in ation was expected to be high in the months ahead. The behavior of expectations was a risk that required close monitoring in a scenario of high in ation, and in which the risk of external shocks causing additional peso depreciations was signi cant. 
Higher in ation and the origin of projection errors had been related mainly to the increased impact of the exchange rate, a development that, in turn, could be related to the sharper peso depreciation, the unusual duration of the depreciation shock, the more gradual slowdown of the economy compared with earlier episodes of depreciation, and the fact that gaps were likely to be somewhat smaller than previously thought. Nevertheless, the change in relative prices associated to this depreciation was, to a large extent, a necessary element in the adjustment process, as had been said many times before. 
In this scenario of weak activity and downward risks, with a labor market headed for a slowdown, in ation expectations at 3% in the forecast horizon, and in ation surprises that seemed to relate largely to the exchange rate adjustment needed in this business cycle, the option of raising the policy rate this time didn ́t seemed relevant. This, despite that high in ation and associated risks doubtlessly conditioned the room available for monetary policy making. Moreover, as the analysis for the Report progressed, it seemed reasonable to use such instance to evaluate the assumptions underlying the scenario described above, in particular the MPR trajectory included in it and the risks for the convergence of in ation. 
On the opposite side, in the present conditions, the option of an additional cut not only seemed unnecessary, but also inconvenient, so the Research Division de nitely ruled it out at this meeting. This vision seemed to be well internalized by the market, as the possibility of further cuts had virtually vanished. For these reasons, the Research Division proposed as the only relevant option to keep the MPR at 3%. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
About the domestic economy, all the Board members agreed that domestic output and demand remained in line with the scenario depicted in the December Report, noting that after a signi cant deceleration during 2014 the cycle had stabilized. 
One Board member noted that the evolution of output and demand was good news, given the risks present. In his view, everything suggested that the real adjustment process had been unfolding in the foreseen terms and according to normal patterns. In any case, he added, there was still the challenge ahead for con dence and expectations indicators to recover. 
One Board member said the data con rmed the diagnosis of a limited recovery of the economy. He drew attention to the evolution of the labor market, especially the weak sensitivity it had shown so far to the business cycle, beyond an evaluation of the long-term unemployment levels. In his opinion, this coincided with the trajectory of wages, which maintained an important dynamism —a topic that called for more emphasis— and could be explaining, in part, the dynamism or the high levels of in ation. Nonetheless, he stressed that, essentially, the evidence showed that the peso depreciation was the main driver of the in ation rate. In multilateral terms, the depreciation had also been important, but quite smaller, which generated more questions. One alternative was that, in the face of changing external conditions, the relative price adjustment the Chilean economy required was not that big; another was that the labor market pressures and the costs of non-tradable goods had so far inhibited the real exchange rate adjustment. 
Turning to in ation, some Board members drew attention to the behavior of private expectations and how they had adjusted to the scenario foreseen by the Bank. They added that, together with a process of moderate growth, he envisioned a slower convergence of in ation to the target than had been predicted a few months back. 
One Board member noted that news about in ation were gloomier than they were about economic activity. The vision that in ation would converge to the target had not changed, but incoming news pointed at a quite slower process. He added that, keeping in mind that the in ation trajectory responded essentially to a domestic adjustment process, it was necessary to keep a watchful eye on the evolution of the in ation dynamic in the coming months. Of course, this meant to closely monitor its main short-term fundamentals in this conjuncture, such as the evolution of the exchange rate and nominal wages. 
One Board member noted that the biggest concern of the Central Bank was in ation. It was still above the tolerance range, and estimations were that it would remain there for a longer time. Although it was not far above the top of the range, one could not minimize the risk of in ation remaining at that level for longer or even increase further. He added that market expectations had adjusted upwards and exceeded those of the December Report over the shorter 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
terms. This, even considering that when the December Report was released the Bank's projection was de ned as high by a large part of the market. Core in ation, he said, had had a similar dynamic. He added that the higher in ation obeyed mainly to the persistently higher exchange rate, which set it apart from previous periods. The greater pass-through coef cient, at least greater than originally anticipated, led to the belief that output gaps were probably smaller than had been assumed at rst. Moreover, this was consistent with the low rates of unemployment and the behavior of wages. Anyway, although in ation expectations one year ahead had risen sharply in recent months, in general they were quite volatile in that horizon. In contrast, expectations two years ahead had remained anchored at 3%. 
About the external scenario, all ve Board members noted that, generally speaking, the global economy had behaved in line with the scenario in the latest Report. There was a somewhat greater than expected increase in output in Europe, a consolidation of US growth and a steeper than forecast drop in the oil price, all of which was positive news. At the same time, however, Latin American economies were weaker, especially Brazil, and Chinese short-term data also pointed at weaker growth. 
All the Board members stressed the sensitivity of international nancial markets to changes in expectations regarding the US monetary policy. They also agreed that the main risk coming from abroad had to do with the expected adjustments to the US monetary policy and a further strengthening of the dollar. One Board member noted that the latest communication from the Federal Reserve made clear that the benchmark rate would be raised more gradually than had been said before their previous meeting. In his view, this was no minor issue, because it reduced, although it obviously did not eliminate, the risk of sharp increases in long-term rates and, further down the line, sudden stops in capital ows. 
One Board member thought it was important to mention that the prevailing economic conditions in some emerging countries reflected significant adjustments and risks. In his opinion, exchange rate movements in these economies showed the changes in the external conditions they faced and the adjustments their domestic demands required. 
As for the monetary policy decision, all ve Board members agreed that the only plausible option was the one presented by the Research Division, that is, holding the MPR at 3%. 
One Board member noted that the changes in the conduct of monetary policy implicit in private expectations had been quite intense. In particular, he stressed that a while ago the market anticipated further monetary easing in 2015—around 50 basis points less in the MPR—, which had tended to dissipate. This was grounded on a vision of weaker growth and reduced in ationary pressures than was perceived at the time. In his opinion, a clear corollary of the above was that the monetary impulse delivered in 2014 had been appropriate, because it allowed to cushion the effects of the deterioration of macroeconomic conditions on growth and demand. He thought that it was still true that the movements of the international scenario in recent months were not very signi cant, as opposed to their potential risks, particularly because of the beginning of the monetary policy normalization in the United States. The uncertainty about how this would affect international nancial markets, emerging economies, external conditions and Chile’s medium-term in ation was high. Thus, although he believed that the only choice this time was to keep the MPR at 3%, he also thought that it was premature to rule out so straightforwardly other alternative policy options. In his view, given the communicational and tactic importance of the Bank’s decisions, considering the prevailing international context it was inappropriate to give any other signs of certainty. 
One Board member noted that although one could argue that the option of raising the MPR was a valid one, as a way to ensure that expectations would remain well anchored around the target, he thought it premature, because that kind of action was more indicated for a worse scenario than the current one. 
One Board member pointed out that monetary policy had accompanied the economy’s deceleration process in a good way and, judging by the evolution of the exchange rate, internal nancial conditions and the in ation trajectory, the contribution had been positive. Therefore, in his opinion, for now there was no room for increasing the monetary stimulus. He thought this was especially critical because the biggest risks came from the possibility of intensi ed exchange rate volatility keeping in ationary pressures at an undesirable level, in a context where the economy would not decelerate further. 
One Board member said that it was dif cult to back a policy option other than keeping the MPR unchanged. The option of lowering it had to be dismissed immediately as inadmissible. The option of raising it admitted, in principle, some degree of plausibility, but a thorough evaluation of all the elements also led to ruling it out. In the current scenario, the advisable thing to do was doubtless to reaf rm the general orientation of monetary policy, as any different signal could have adverse effects on the market’s expectations formation. 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member indicated that the Central Bank had done its homework, with a signi cant and timely countercyclical monetary policy. However, it was clear that developments in in ation, particularly with regard to expectations, indicated that at present there was no room for further monetary stimulus. The option of raising the MPR did not seem reasonable at this time. However, he believed that he could not rule out a priori that in the near future this option could be valid. In fact, market prices had already incorporated an increase in the MPR for the third quarter of this year and expectations surveys considered it for next year. However, he concluded, the analysis pointed to in ation gradually converging to the 3% target, inter alia by wider capacity gaps and very low international in ation. However, the risks had increased and called for close attention. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marshall, and Board members Claro, Vial, and García, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3%. 
