MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY 
MEETING The monetary policy session N° 196 was held on 14 March 2013. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board member; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Present as well: the Minister of Finance, Felipe Larraín. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Kevin. Cowan, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Claudio Raddatz, Economic Research Manager; Luis Opazo, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Consultant Manager of Communications; Enrique Orellana, Monetary Policy Strategy and Communication Manager; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publically available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s web site 2/. 
2. Options 
On this occasion, with the information gathered since the last meeting, the Research Division presented as the relevant option to keep the monetary policy interest rate (MPR) at 5.0%. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
International information received since the publication of December’s Monetary Policy Report did not modify signi cantly the baseline scenario for the global economy. Regarding risks, however, while the scal and nancial situation in the Eurozone remained fragile, the probabilities of negative scenarios for the United States or China, that had been previously envisioned, had moderated. On the contrary, there was some degree of increased con dence in the international markets. 
Locally, the unemployment rate had declined further and domestic capacity conditions were estimated to be still tight. Output was growing somewhat above trend estimates, driven by domestic demand and especially investment. The recent rebound in private consumption had gone hand in hand with higher labor income growth—re ected in the evolution of employment and wages—, and with the recent drop in CPI in ation. 
Meanwhile, household debt had been slowing, particularly in its consumer loans component. The greater demand pressures had manifested in an increase in imports and a wider de cit of the current account, thus moderating its effects on the use of domestic resources and in ation. Core in ation had dropped further for both goods and services, and it was already down to 0.8% annually, while headline in ation was at 1.3% annually. This slow in ation trajectory was worth noting, contrasted with the dynamism shown by domestic expenditure, output and employment. This trend re ected the transitory in uence of some recent factors, such as the appreciation of the peso, the normalization of earlier shocks in the prices of some perishables, and the reduction in the stamp tax, but more permanent effects could not be ruled out, such as faster productivity growth. For the time being, the diagnosis remained that this was a temporary phenomenon, which should tend to fade into the horizon projection, but such a hypothesis required further evaluation. Notwithstanding this expected normalization, the recent drops in international food prices and lower regulated utility rates expected for the coming months would lessen the manifestation of this normalization in the short term. 
Regarding the monetary policy decision, as in past meetings, the option of lowering the policy rate could be justi ed as a response to a persistent fall in in ation. However, the accumulated dynamism of expenditure, output and employment, along with the stability of in ation expectations around the target and the moderation of external risks, led to estimate that the recent low in ation indicators were a temporary phenomenon that should be normalized within the policy horizon. On the contrary, a reduction in the interest rate could further strengthen domestic demand, exacerbating the risks for medium-term in ation 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
and other variables such as the current account de cit. Accordingly, the option of lowering the policy rate was dismissed. 
On the other hand, the option of raising it could be warranted as a response to the recent dynamics of output and its possible boost to the in ation trajectory. Although this was a signi cant risk for the medium term, as of yet current indicators for headline and core in ation were signi cantly below 3%, a situation that was likely to continue into the coming months, considering the incidence of international commodity prices. Also, private in ation expectations remained aligned with the target, and the services and wage components of in ation showed no signs of acceleration. These developments led to discard the option of raising the policy rate. 
Notwithstanding the above, the pace of expansion of domestic demand could pose a risk because of its implications for the current account de cit and external funding needs, but addressing this issue required the coordination of all economic and nancial policies, beyond monetary policy. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
All the Board members underscored the improvements abroad and the calmer global nancial markets. Speaking about the United States, they stressed that the probability of extreme scenarios had eased and there were more positive signs in terms of growth. This scenario, they said, had led to a rebalancing of portfolios that had pushed up stock prices, strengthened the dollar, and reduced capital ows to emerging countries and the prices of commodities. One Board member also highlighted the consolidation of China’s growth rate in single-digit numbers. 
However, all the Board members noted that risk in the Eurozone remained fully in force. Several Board members commented on the greater political risks and the clear signs of reform fatigue, which in a context of low output and high unemployment kept open a scenario of systemic risk in the region. In this sense, one Board member argued that the dif culties facing Italy were worrying, since French banks were among the main creditors of the Italian public debt. According to the Board member, the persistent risks in the Eurozone also had to do with a capital ight towards German banks. Because these banks’ excess liquidity was deposited in the European Central Bank, which in turn delivered that liquidity to the banks from which deposits were exiting, commitments were being generated that grew uncontrollably. Thus, concluded this Board member, Europe was still not converging, and barring substantial changes, the likelihood 
of a worst-case scenario would rise. Yet one Board member noted that the effects of political uncertainty in Italy had been limited and circumscribed. 
One Board member said that it was dif cult to infer a situation of excess supply in the copper market, because behind the sharp increase in stock market inventories nancial agents played a role as off-market inventories were owing to the stock market. Still, he continued, these factors left the copper price more exposed to a free fall. 
With respect to the local economy, all the Board members commented on the strength of output and especially domestic demand because of the risks it could pose going forward. 
Some Board members highlighted the role that the sectors related to natural resources had played in the output trajectory. This, because in recent quarters the growth rate of other sectors’ GDP had remained fairly stable at just over 5.5%. One Board member opined that although the gure was slightly higher than the estimates of potential growth, they did not suggest, in general terms, any exceptional dynamic aside from its contrast with the fragility of developed economies. 
One Board member noted that while GDP growth had stabilized around its potential, the same had not occurred with domestic demand, which was outgrowing it by nearly two points. Since the reference point was a current account de cit, this de cit at constant prices was on an upward trend. This Board member went on to observe that said excess demand would normally be re ected also in in ationary pressures, which had been spared so far due to the peso appreciation, probably one-time productivity gains, and the reversal of earlier temporary cost increases. 
One Board member said that, in his view, the risk of the domestic baseline scenario had increased, since domestic demand was persistently strong. The current account de cit was widening, which implied a future risk. Nonetheless, this risk was eased by the fact that it was largely based on investment in the tradable sector rather than consumption. Plus, at least so far, borrowing indicators for the different economic players showed no signs of being on the rise. 
All the Board members stressed the low in ation records. One Board member drew attention to the decline of non-tradable in ation. However, he said, the path of output and demand going forward suggested that in ation should remain relatively low for some months, to approach 3% later this year or early into 2014. One Board member noted that in ation risks had not disappeared 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
in the policy horizon. This, because in his view, the evaluation of the in ation outlook, and particularly its implications for monetary policy, required keeping in mind not only the isolated behavior of in ation, but a broader set of macroeconomic data. Worth mentioning among these were, without a doubt, the vigor of the national economy and the narrow capacity gaps that remained available. 
Some Board members commented on the challenges imposed by the existing interest rate differentials between developed and emerging countries for economic policy making in the emerging world, including Chile. In this context, they stressed that Chile’s MPR was high by international standards. One Board member drew attention to the fact that, in addition, Chile, along with Malaysia and Peru, was one of the few economies that had not reduced its MPR in the last fteen months. This Board member commented that, in his opinion, most of the interest rate cuts were not intended as countercyclical measures but rather to defend their currencies against the monetary stimulus packages of developed economies. Another Board member drew attention to the fact that, in this context, there were countries with a dynamic similar to Chile’s and with the same policy dilemmas, but whose monetary policy rate was signi cantly lower. 
All the Board members agreed that the scenario analyzed posed a dilemma for monetary policy making, because there were opposing forces recommending decisions in opposite directions Nevertheless, they concluded that the right decision was to keep the MPR at 5%. 
One Board member noted that the economic outlook, while positive, posed complex dilemmas to the Central Bank. On one hand, there was better news on the international front, but signi cant risks remained in Europe. On the other, the Chilean economy was still growing at a pace close to its potential, with low unemployment and in ation that was not only low, but had temporarily fallen below the target. These dilemmas arose because in the midst of this very positive picture imbalances could be incubating that could in the medium term impose costly adjustments to the country’s economy. The problem for the Central Bank was that for as long as said imbalances did not manifest, the effectiveness of monetary policy to prevent them was limited. However, concluded this Board member, the excessive growth in demand had a transitory component, associated with large mining and energy projects piling up. In addition, the low levels of in ation and high FDI ows bought some time to nd ways that would allow optimizing the economic responses in order to prevent such imbalances. 
One Board member stated that two conclusions could be drawn from the 
developments analyzed: First, that the foreign cycle was still favorable for Chile, beyond the signi cant risks that existed in Europe. Second, that the most important thing to observe of the domestic cycle was the dynamism of investment. This Board member warned that even considering the strength of Chile’s external accounts, it was important not to allow the incubation of important nancial risks. In his opinion, the normal growth of credit aggregates, the monitoring of certain sectors and the exibility of the exchange rate were important tools in a context like this. He concluded that holding the policy rate at was clearly the dominating option. The current cycle provided no room for a reduction, even with low in ation, and raising it would not necessarily help mitigate the main risks that were envisioned. 
One Board member was of the view that the risks to the baseline scenario had been recently rebalanced and the relative weight of each one of them had changed somewhat. Thus, the external risks had lessened and domestic ones had gained strength, a situation that required further follow-up. However, he went on, the current level of the MPR was relatively high, which provided suf cient leeway to facilitate the convergence of the economy, and particularly of in ation. The analyses performed in preparing the upcoming Monetary Policy Report would provide valuable background to revisit this and other topics. 
One Board member pointed out that the policy puzzle was still present. This meant that pressures because of tight domestic markets were still accumulating. Neither the wage mass nor domestic expenditure showed steady-state growth rates, even though there were temporary elements in domestic spending, including investment in mining and transport equipment. This scenario would advise taking preventive measures to curb this dynamic. At the same time, the international scene would recommend having interest rates more in line with international interest rates, in order to x any misalignment of relative prices. This Board member continued by pointing out that, despite the advantages of oating exchange rates, prospects that the interest-rate differentials with the developed world would persist for a long time resulted in any pressures that might exist on the relative prices of the different economies would be signi cant. 
One Board member expressed the view that the option submitted by the Research Division was the best one. Raising the policy rate was unsustainable in a scenario where headline and core in ation continued to be below the tolerance range of the Central Bank. The option of lowering the rate was not adequate either, as the signs of domestic demand deceleration remained subdued and uncertain and, actually, its level was still high. In these circumstances, there seemed not to be major changes which would justify a different position with respect to the previous meeting. 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided to maintain the monetary policy rate at 5.0% annually. Voting for this action, Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board members Marshall, Claro and Vial. 
