MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary Policy Meeting No. 232, held on 17 March 2016. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member; Mario Marcel, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Rodrigo Valdés. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policy Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information minutes and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
Since the last policy meeting, calm had returned to nancial markets. The prices of riskier assets had rebounded, emerging markets’ currencies had appreciated and risk premiums were back at their levels of late 2015. The sources of risk remained present, however, so there was signi cant probability of episodes like those seen in January and February. So, nancial conditions facing emerging economies could be expected to remain tighter than in previous years for some time. Meanwhile, a not-so-optimistic vision about the velocity of global economic recovery had been established, In that context, the main central banks had opted for making (or giving signs that they would make) their 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
policies more expansionary by some degrees with respect to expectations some months back, including a somewhat more dovish Fed than anticipated. Thus, the slowdown of trading partners’ growth, lower terms of trade, and nancial conditions remaining tight for longer implied that the external impulse the Chilean economy would receive would be milder than foreseen in December, although not differing much from earlier years. 
In Chile, nancial markets had also reacted positively, and worth singling out was the nominal exchange rate declining to less than its gure at the statistical closing of the last Report and near those of August 2015. The real exchange rate (RER) was around 94, less than what models based on fundamentals indicated, so some real depreciation of the peso could be expected for the quarters to come. 
At the local level, the National Accounts revealed a less dynamic economy at the end of 2015. Beyond some base effects, growth in private consumption and investment was lower than anticipated. Other sectors’ GDP, though constant in annual terms, was lower than forecast in the fourth quarter. Available data also showed a weaker economy. In this context, the growth forecast for 2016 contained in the Monetary Policy Report of March had been revised downward, with a moderate recovery assumed for 2017. 
Regarding in ation, the data had tended to con rm that the early part of the year would be characterized by high in ation rates. The market had moved in that direction, increasing in ation expectations for the end of this year, although the fundamentals generally pointed at an easing of in ationary pressures compared with three months before. Going forward, a somewhat faster convergence was expected than in December, largely in uenced by a more benign behavior of some elements not in the CPIEFE category. 
As had been mentioned before, in the current context the monetary policy challenge was to provide the right monetary impulse for an economy growing below potential, but safeguarding the convergence of in ation. Failing to do so would call for more aggressive policy actions in the future, which could affect the economy’s dynamism. Under this predicament, the Bank’s Board had decided, by the end of last year, to withdraw part of the monetary stimulus then in place. The case for reducing the monetary policy could be synthesized as follows: 
First, while short-term projections had been in line with expectations, a longer- spanning look showed that the deviation of in ation from its target—and from the Bank’s internal projections—had been bigger and more persistent than expected, largely because the economy had endured a greater and stronger string of shocks that had resulted in a sharper depreciation of the peso. All 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
this had happened in a context where indexation played an important role and output gaps remained bounded, causing greater than expected second-round effects. Second, the labor market had been more resilient than previously thought, limiting the deceleration of non-tradable in ation, even in a context where activity had been unexpectedly slow. This re ected, for example, in the behavior of wages. Third, Chile had implemented a substantial and quick adjustment and exhibited no signi cant imbalances, which, combined with the assumption that the external economy would gain dynamism as time passed, led to anticipate that the economy would begin growing near its potential within the projection horizon. 
The analyses leading to the March Report showed that the above arguments persisted, so the general orientation of monetary policy was still to make it less expansionary. The exchange rate, however, while still very volatile, remained near its August 2015 values; the labor market signaled a somewhat stronger adjustment on the margin; and everything indicated that the economy would take longer to resume higher growth, because of both the weakening of late last year and the lower foreseen impulse from abroad. Thus, the MPR trajectory depicted in the baseline scenario ran below the one estimated in December. 
The construction of the policy options uses that baseline scenario as its key benchmark, as does the analysis of possible deviations from that benchmark and its consequences. The latter called for increased caution in the discussion of the future course of monetary policy. 
First, beyond the effects of the tax reform, in ation remained high and its convergence to the target was expected to be slow. High, sustained in ation was a risk in its own right for the in ation dynamic, owing both to its possible effects on the formation of expectations, and to second-round effects. Furthermore, in this context, although there were risks for in ation deviating in either direction, the Research Division estimated that the risks associated with a higher-than- expected in ation rate were more dif cult to rectify than those coming from in ation being lower. 
Second, as had already been stated in several Reports, the convergence of in ation in the baseline scenario hinged mainly in that the stabilization of the exchange rate would allow for a signi cant reduction in tradable in ation in the second half of the year, and only partially in arguments about the moderation of non-tradable in ation associated with the weak cycle. With ups and downs, the exchange rate did not differ much from its August level, but there were risks of new episodes of depreciation. Of course, the idea was not to tie monetary policy to the exchange rate, which would be inconsistent with the policy framework, 
but to recognize that the second-round effects associated to these developments would affect the convergence of in ation. 
Lastly, the evidence showed that the effects of the activity slowdown on in ation were bounded. Although the adjustments to the scal policy and, in general, the downward adjustments to output in the projection scenario went in the direction of opening up room for monetary policy, there was no doubt that these increases were limited and not the main reason behind the assumption that in ation would converge within the projection horizon. 
In this context, the Research Division believed that the option of raising the MPR by 25 basis points, to 3.75%, was still a valid one, essentially because an upward movement at that point reduced the likelihood of having to make more drastic changes in the future. 
Notwithstanding, the Research Division thought that the option of keeping the rate at 3.5% continued to be the most consistent alternative with the baseline scenario and its risks, especially considering that this scenario assumed more measured increases in the MPR than estimated in December. This option was also grounded in that in ation expectations remained well anchored. 
The scenario presented at this meeting posed communicational challenges that, as usual, had to be handled with care. To begin with, there was the desire to communicate that the most likely course of monetary policy would continue to be to withdraw some of the current stimulus, yet not as intensely as foreseen in December. Also, as had been mentioned, there were several reasons to be particularly cautious about the conclusions from the analysis. There were two elements that could help face this challenge: one, to stress in the communication that the baseline scenario is a benchmark for policy decisions, but the Board’s decisions are contingent on the evolution of the events determining the convergence of in ation to the target. Thus, in case of deviation, monetary policy will need to adjust in the direction that ensures such convergence. 
And two, the March Report was to be released in a few days, and the varied associated communication instances provided the ideal occasion to convey these issues to the public. For this reason, recognizing that the change from December in the MPR trajectory was an argument consistent with evaluating a change in the bias at this meeting, it seemed that considering the briefness of the press release, there was the risk of confusing the market, so the Research Division recommended evaluating it after the Report had been released. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
2. Monetary policy decision 
About the international scenario, several Board members noted the greater calm that was perceived in nancial markets compared with what had been observed in the rst two policy meetings of the year. However, they added that this behavior did not necessarily mean lower risks going forward and that new stress episodes were a real possibility, since the originating elements were still present. 
One Board member added that, although the recent decision by the Fed of holding the rate constant had given some respite, the prospect remained of diverging monetary policies in the big coalitions of the world and the risk of currency-related competition among some countries. Likewise, the greater calm in China and its decision to adopt more expansionary policies to boost growth had not eliminated the challenge of reconciling the objectives of growth recomposition and increased capital account openness with the stability of the exchange rate. He also noted that the reduced expectations for world growth had played a part in the more expansionary orientation of monetary policy in developed economies, including negative policy rates in some of them, although how effective such policies would be in inducing increased activity and/or higher in ation was still a matter of intense debate. 
One Board member estimated that the lower risk aversion of recent weeks could not necessarily be taken as good news, as it re ected weaker numbers for output and in ation, especially in Europe and Japan, which had translated into a new round of monetary stimulus packages and a more cautious position of the Fed. He opined that to the extent that this weaker external demand coexisted with episodes of increased risk aversion, it was easy to predict adverse effects on Chile’s growth, but much more dif cult to predict its effect on in ation. His impression, considering the events of the last cycle, was that the pressures from a possible depreciation of the peso would predominate. 
In the opinion of one Board member it wasn’t easy to distinguish the causes behind the greater calm in the markets. On one hand, the Chinese authorities had shown to be more willing to implement more aggressive scal and monetary policies, which could be shaping the vision that a scenario of signi cant deterioration was less likely. However, he added, the problems were still there and no big change was expected in the projections. He thought that the most important news came from the United States, where the numbers continued to show steady recovery and normalizing in ation rates, and the Fed had tapered its prospect of interest rate increases. This, together with developments in Europe had boosted risk taking again. He then noted that the risks in these scenarios were obvious: if the movements re ected a secular weakening of the world 
economy, more persistent corrections would be seen in growth and maybe an additional and more persistent fall in commodity prices. Another possibility was that the US monetary policy, although not explicitly, would try to avoid further strengthening of the dollar. His impression was that the US cycle could make a monetary policy correction inevitable in the coming quarters, with new adjustments in the prices of assets and commodities. 
One Board member noted that Chile had responded well to the vagaries of the international economy at the turn of 2016, which had re ected in less volatile sovereign spreads and capital movements compared to other countries in the region and the emerging world. This had been especially aided by the stability of the macroeconomic policy framework and the lower vulnerability of the country’s nancial sector and scal accounts. Thus, although the exchange rate had been highly volatile, re ecting its role as an adjustment variable to external and internal changes, the markets had remained noticeably more stable. 
All the Board members stressed that other important piece of news of the month came from local activity. Indicators for the latter part of last year and into 2016 revealed weak domestic output and demand, below those forecast a few months before. One Board member recalled the paradox in December about the resilience of consumption despite deteriorated expectations, which was tending to dissipate with incoming information. In the last quarter of 2015 private consumption had grown at a much slower pace than expected, more consistently with the pessimism of households as shown in the surveys. He added that scal policy had adjusted, re ecting lower levels of structural revenues for this year, which undoubtedly also re ected a less dynamic scenario for Chile into the future. 
In the opinion of one Board member, what stood out the most was the slowdown in private consumption, a variable that tended to be fairly stable, so it drove a downward revision to this and next year’s outlook. However, the question arose whether such weakening was or was not a temporary phenomenon associated with the sharp depreciation of the period and increased international nancial turmoil. This was something that needed careful monitoring in the coming months, especially if episodes of global nancial volatility recurred. 
One Board member said that the output and demand indicators at hand led to a substantial revision to the growth forecast for 2016 and a moderate growth outlook also for 2017. This assumption was particularly uncertain considering the remoteness of 2017 and its uncertain internal and external determinants but, in his view, they justi ed in ationary pressures being bounded in the medium term and, therefore, monetary policy should remain expansionary throughout the whole period of analysis. 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
With regard to in ation, one Board member commented that the weakening of domestic demand and slowing growth projected for 2016 implied a widening of capacity gaps. This led to a reduction in in ationary inertia and faster convergence to the target. One key factor behind this adjustment in the projections was the milder currency devaluation that would be felt in the CPI especially in the coming months, plus lower pressures coming from energy and the absence of the adjustments in administered prices and taxes that had in uenced in ation in the rst quarter of the year. 
One Board member noted that the in ation trajectory had been very close to expectations toward the end of last year. The exchange rate, the main factor behind the in ation increase, had appreciated signi cantly. Salaried in ation, after decelerating even more than previously thought, had had a rebound, but still within its habitual range of variability, and its possible impact on prices should naturally come via its potential effect on employment. Thus, he continued, the bulk of cyclical information pointed at lower in ationary pressures in the short to medium term. 
One Board member, noted that in ation had been in line with estimates, validating the prospect of slow convergence to 3%. Overall, wages had posted a monthly increase which, although it should not be overestimated, it did re ect that the wage dynamism had remained strong and consistent with the dynamics of services in ation. 
One Board member, along with noting the continuing in ation persistence and its trajectory behaving as estimated in the December Report, stressed that internal and market projections saw in ation declining very gradually and staying above 4% for several months more. This, in his view, in itself posed a risk to the Central Bank. Should such trajectory fail to occur and persistence last even longer, the period of in ation above the target would continue to stretch, eroding the credibility of monetary policy. In that sense, he felt that while there were risks in both directions for in ation, its persistence at its current high levels for almost two years meant that the upside risks were much more costly than the downside risks. 
Some Board members discussed the evolution of the exchange rate and the RER depreciation assumption implicit in the Report’s baseline scenario being examined. One Board member thought that the signi cant nominal strengthening of the peso in the past few weeks and the level attained by the real exchange rate, similar to its 15-year average, seemed to be inconsistent with the economy’s cyclical position and could rather be re ecting movements of a nancial nature. 
Turning to the monetary policy decision, all ve Board members agreed that the options presented by the Research Division were the proper ones. One Board member said that, in the current circumstances, the options were consistent with the policy orientation delivered by the Board in the December Report and, in that context, keeping the MPR at 3.5% was the right thing to do. About the monetary policy bias, he noted that it was dif cult to communicate it on the eve of a Report, but, if anything, he believed that it should adequately re ect the longer pause derived from the analyses to date. 
One Board member stressed that the process of medium-term projections associated with the soon upcoming Monetary Policy Report led to estimate slower growth in the period 2016-2017, reduced in ationary pressures and also a more measured path for the MPR than anticipated earlier. It was thus clear that the appropriate choice for this meeting was to keep the MPR at 3.5% and, in fact, an overwhelming majority of the market so expected. About the bias, this Board member said that the preliminary analysis for the Report suggested an MPR trajectory that was materially different from the December forecast. In his opinion, these differences suf ced to warrant a change in the wording of the bias. Not doing it, under the argument that the Report would provide the opportunity to carefully explain such trajectory, seemed to be a particularly feeble justi cation, as it implied suspending the critical role that the meeting played in terms of publishing a signi cant aspect of the press release. 
One Board member pointed out that the data had con rmed the validity of the decision to gradually withdraw some of the monetary stimulus. He agreed that increased external and internal weakness should lead to a more measured removal of the stimulus than had been anticipated. As for the bias, he thought it convenient to maintain the tone of the previous Communication, because there had been no substantive change in the direction of monetary policy, and the Monetary Policy Report that would be released in a few days would explain the Board’s vision in greater detail. 
One Board member said that the Bank’s policy scheme had made enormous progress in its commitment with exchange rate exibility. The past few years’ stability of interest rates and in ation expectations were proof of the validity of that scheme. The prospect of a still expansionary monetary policy while ensuring the convergence of in ation to 3% within a reasonable time, had to be reinforced. Thus, he believed that the communication of the monetary policy bias should continue to emphasize the Bank’s commitment to the in ation target, in a context where monetary policy should be adjusted slowly in the coming quarters or years. 
5 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member stated that the option of raising the MPR was consistent with in ation being persistently above the target range of the Central Bank and the risks associated with in ation remaining at those levels for longer. Such a situation would end up in more abrupt adjustments in the future, not a desirable outcome. The option of holding the policy rate at was more in line with the assumption that in the current state of the cycle in ationary pressures were bound to diminish, with the exchange rate having stabilized beyond its usual uctuations, and with world in ation remaining low. Also, and very importantly, it was consistent with in ation expectations two years out remaining anchored to the target. He thought it was worth emphasizing the stability of interest rates at all maturities and the moderate increase in Chile’s risk premium, all in an environment where unwavering adherence to the in ation targeting policy was evident and where there had been no exchange rate intervention. This made Chile stand out from other countries. The expansionary monetary policy of the Central Bank had been crucial to contain the slowdown in activity and for the resilience of the labor market. The low interest rates, which for the long term were at or near their all-time lows, were a clear proof of this. However, as had been raised in the last Report and in previous meetings, for in ation to converge to the target it was necessary to gradually withdraw the monetary impulse. The market had understood that the monetary policy instance was expansionary, but also that the Central Bank was bound by its mandate to safeguard the stability of the currency. About the bias, this Board member was in favor of keeping the same bias of the previous press release. This, not only because failing to do so would be a misleading signal days before the Report—as that instance would allow more accuracy—, but also because it would indicate lack of concern over core and headline in ation being way above the target and, most importantly, for a long time already. In his view, the orientation of the monetary policy had to remain consistent with an unambiguous commitment with the Bank’s mandate. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Claro, and Board members Vial, García and Marcel, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3.5%. 
