MINUTES OF THE 
MONETARY POLICY MEETING The monetary policy session N°185 was held on 17 May 2012. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board member; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Present the Minister of Finance, Felipe Larraín. 
Also present, Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Kevin Cowan, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Market Manager; Luis Opazo, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Consultant Manager of Communications; Enrique Orellana, Monetary Policy Strategy and Communication Manager; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
1.1 Brie ng 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publically available information may be accessed on the Bank’s web site1/. 
1.2 Background analysis and comments 
The evolution of the international scenario was discussed; in particular, the potential effects that a worsening of the Greek crisis could have on other European economies. The coupling among the risks of Spain, Italy and France could be signaling this situation. Another debated issues related to the scal problems to be endured by the United States in the short to medium term, and their effects over other de cit-ridden countries. 
On the domestic economy, the discussion centered on the reasons behind the downward revision of short-term in ation expectations and the monetary policy rate (MPR). It was noted that the reduction in expected in ation was likely to be responding to one-time phenomena such as the fall in the oil price, lower headline in ation gures, and the changes in speci c prices relating to the tax reform bill under debate. However, the downward revision of MPR expectations was more surprising, because the above mentioned phenomena’s impact was rather speci c and the medium-term risks for in ation were still latent. It was pointed out that, although dif cult to elucidate, the deterioration in the external situation could be behind the change. Overall, the fact that it coincided with the continuing dynamism of the domestic scenario and the upward revision of the market’s growth expectations called for special attention. 
2. Options 
Considering the information gathered since the last meeting, the Research Division reviewed the options relevant for the MPR on this occasion: (i) to keep it at 5.0%; or (ii) to raise it by 25 basis points, to 5.25%. 
The latest Monetary Policy Report outlined an external scenario characterized by low growth of developed economies, continuing frictions in international nancial markets and lower terms of trade than in 2011. New data received since the closing of the Report and especially in the last month did not depart signi cantly from this baseline scenario, but the international risks, particularly those associated with the Eurozone were tilting toward more negative scenarios. 
Domestically, although somewhat stronger, recent output and demand gures were not so different from those in the Report’s baseline scenario. One aspect worth noting was the increased dynamism of investment in construction and infrastructure spending, which normally shows an inertial behavior that contrasted with the moderation in inventories and investment in imported machinery & equipment, which are usually more volatile. 
1/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
The Report foresaw that in the rst half of the year in ation would be in the upper part of the tolerance range, due to the incidence of temporary shocks to the prices of fuels and perishables. This risk was now smaller thanks to the recent behavior of the global price of oil and its derivatives. Core indicators, in particular the services component and nominal wages, showed no further acceleration that could indicate that the output gap or the labor market was tighter than estimated. Nor was there a slowdown indicating that the risk had declined. It would be necessary to continue monitoring this aspect. 
With respect to the option of raising the MPR, the last Report had used as a working assumption that moderate, gradual increases would de ne the trajectory for the second half of the year, consistently with what could be derived from the nancial prices expected at that moment. If and when the adjustments would be made would depend on the evolution of domestic and external economic conditions. 
Making the MPR adjustments sooner could be warranted by, among other reasons, a more favorable evolution of the external scenario, an acceleration of output, demand, or core in ation growth. Also if there was a greater pass- through of temporary supply pressures to other prices, such as labor costs or in ation expectations. These conditions were not present this time, so the option of raising the MPR was ruled out at this meeting. 
The option of keeping the MPR unchanged was based on the fact that it was within a range of neutral values, while short-term in ation risks seemed bounded. This provided exibility to wait for new information about the evolution of the external situation, the strength of the Chilean economy and the state of core in ationary pressures. 
The option to maintain was the most expected by the market, so it had to be neutral in the evolution of the interest rate curve. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
All the Board members noted that global risks had increased. Commenting on the Eurozone, the resurgence of the possible exit of Greece from the euro and the banking situation in Spain were brought up. All the Board members mentioned the publication of weaker than expected output indicators in several economies, including the U.S., China, Brazil and other emerging and commodity exporting countries. This had led to signi cant asset price adjustments, increased risk aversion and volatility in external nancial markets. 
Some Board members estimated that the recent stress episode was in line with forecasts in the March Report. However, one Board member argued that these tensions revealed problems that were increasingly costly to resolve, and whose effects on developing countries could be harsher and longer lasting. Another Board member considered that the reappearance of negative risks went beyond the possible nancial tensions contained in the baseline scenario of that Report. This, considering that the sovereign risks of Spain, Italy and France, while lower in the latter, had coupled with each other since the beginning of the year, giving rise to the hypothesis of systemic contagion from possible crises or disorderly resolutions of the zone’s current nancial tensions. 
One Board member stated that, despite increased external turbulences, no major tensions could be seen in the local nancial markets apart from the adjustments of some asset prices and the exchange rate that are normal in these situations. 
All the Board members noted that domestic output had been unexpectedly high. Some of them pointed out that, in any case, it was growing at around the trend velocity. One Board member noted that, although domestic demand was slowing, its evolution had to be monitored with caution, because private consumption and expenditure in construction and infrastructure were growing signi cantly. Another Board member commented that for the rst time in two years domestic demand had increased less than the GDP. Another Board member noted that, while in Chile output gures exceeded expectations, in the rest of the world they had fallen short. In his view, the decoupling of expectations in Chile with respect to international developments raised the risks for our economy of a potentially disorderly resolution of the situation in the Eurozone. 
Several Board members called the attention to the behavior of the labor market, particularly the signs of tightness and the signi cant increase in wages. In the opinion of one Board member, real wages outgrowing trend productivity called for caution because the labor markets were already stressed. Besides, he added, the remunerations dynamism was driven by the construction and mining sectors, precisely the ones with the tightest capacity situation. 
Some Board members commented on the increase in lending interest rates. One of them highlighted the higher cost of short-term commercial credit, an important source of working capital. Another Board member called the attention to the consumer credit segment, where the slowdown of credit growth and the higher interest rates should help to moderate the behavior of private consumption, especially its durable component. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
All the Board members stated that in ation had been lower than forecast and that short-term expectations had been adjusted downward, while for two years ahead they were still hovering around the target. In the opinion of one of them, the in ation outlook for the medium term that was inferred from the dynamism of demand, output and the labor market had not changed much with respect to the Report, but it was more likely that the recoiling of the more volatile components would take longer and, also, the risks of an external slowdown had risen. Another Board member said that the effective in ation trajectory would most likely be below expectations in the coming months, due to the recent evolution of commodity prices and the potential impact of tax reforms under discussion that might affect some products or services with a signi cant incidence in the CPI. 
With respect to the monetary policy decision, all the Board members ruled an increase out, and considered that the best option was to hold the MPR at 5%. One Board member argued that leaving out the global outlook, in ationary risks in Chile were still biased upward because of closing output gaps, a tight labor market and strong domestic demand. Should the global crisis deepen and continue, it would affect the expectations of economic agents in Chile, altering the risk balance for in ation. In these circumstances, this Board member thought, it would be most appropriate to maintain the MPR, but paying very close attention to the unfolding of external events, applying timely evaluation to possible signs of contagion in the local economy, especially in nancial markets. 
One Board member said that, just as in the last few meetings the decision to lower the MPR had not been an option, this time the option to raise it was easily ruled out. All in all, concluded this Board member, for the time being he did not envision a clear trend in the MPR. 
One Board member expressed the view that it was clear that the most proper option was to maintain the MPR. Although the—downward biased—risks from abroad had increased, they were suf ciently offset by domestic risks in the opposite direction. Intensi ed or persistent external risks could shape a new scenario. However, the current level of the MPR left room to wait for new information to come in before deciding on the next steps to be taken. 
One Board member asserted that in a complex environment like the current one, where the developments in Chile recommended raising the MPR while those in the global economy recommended lowering it, the most prudent decision was to keep it where it was. 
One Board member suggested there were two forces, clearly distinguishable, pulling in opposite directions in terms of monetary policy. He added that it was dif cult to think that if a negative external scenario persisted it would not manifest itself in the local economy sooner than later. The risks in the external scenario were high, more so than in recent months, while at the same time actual and expected in ation gures were aligned with the target. In ation-related risks were still present and had to be closely observed and controlled, but in the short term they seemed bounded. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided to maintain the monetary policy rate at 5.0% annually. Voting for this action, Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board members Marshall, Claro and Vial. 
