MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY 
MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 210 held on 15 May 2014. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Enrique Marshall, Vice-Governor; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member. 
Present the Finance Undersecretary, Alejandro Micco. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Erika Arraño, Executive Secretary to the Governor’s Cabinet; Ivonne Vera, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
2. Options 
Based on the data known after the last meeting, the Research Division presented as relevant options keeping the monetary policy rate (MPR) at 4% or lowering it by 25 basis points, to 3.75%. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
The international outlook was similar to the one analyzed in the last meeting and the contents in March’s Monetary Policy Report, except for improved global nancial conditions. Concern over China’s economic growth and the Chinese nancial system continued. 
Domestic gures con rmed that GDP in other sectors than natural resources and nal demand were growing at a moderate pace as had been forecast in the last Report, continuing the pattern that had begun in mid-2013. This rate of expansion, lower than potential growth estimates, involved a reduction in the use of installed capacity, which in the medium term would ease domestic in ationary pressures and would help moderate the current account de cit. However, the estimate of available output gaps was imprecise. In this regard, it had to be noted that the unemployment rate remained at historically low levels, although in recent months there had been signs of decompression, such as a drop in salaried job creation, fewer vacancies and an increase in the number of self-employed workers. 
In April, again in ation had been unexpectedly high. In the past four months, the CPI and the CPIEFE had accumulated increases of 2.1 and 2.2 percentage points, respectively. This behavior generally re ected the impact of the depreciation of the peso, plus the in uence of higher world prices of foodstuffs. Still, it was worth noting the rebound in services in ation, which re ected the incidence of several adjustments in tariffs, which partly obeyed to the recent movements of the exchange rate. At the same time, those areas most directly linked to the evolution of wages showed an inertial behavior. Oddly, the nominal wages’ variation had been rising in the last few months, despite the reduced dynamism of the labor market. Real wages, however, were slowing down because of rising in ation. 
April’s in ationary surprise had affected expectations at the nearest terms. However, it was important to note that this was not the case at longer terms. Actually, in ation expectations at the monetary policy horizons remained around 3% annually, meaning that the recent surprises were construed as temporary effects on in ation and that output gaps would help ease domestic in ationary pressures at the medium term. 
The option to hold the MPR unchanged could be justi ed by the fact that the rate had already been lowered by 100 basis points over the past few months, the short- and long-term market rates had declined, and the real exchange rate was depreciated with respect to its historical average. At the same time, in ation was temporarily above the upper limit of the tolerance range. Keeping the MPR this time, without ruling out the possibility of further adjustments, would allow accumulating more information about the persistence of the in ationary 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
surprises of recent months. Although in the most likely scenario the increase in annual in ation above 4% would be temporary, as was also re ected in market expectations, the string of upside surprises recommended some degree of caution regarding this issue. 
The decision to lower the MPR was consistent with the prediction that output gaps would continue to accumulate in the economy, which over the medium term should ease in ationary pressures. This scenario, as had been stated in the last Monetary Policy Report, might call for an additional monetary impulse to make sure that in ation would stay around the target over the policy horizon. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
About the global economy, all the Board members agreed that developments in the last month were according to March’s Report. 
Domestically, all ve Board members agreed that recent data con rmed the slow growth of output and demand, with a weak performance of investment and a sharper than expected slowdown in consumption. About the labor market, several Board members noted that, consistently with the foregoing, there were signs of a slowdown in job creation. They mentioned in particular, an increase in unemployment, a contraction in salaried employment and vacancies, and the information taken from April’s Business Perception Report. In contrast, some Board members highlighted the dynamics of wages and employment in aggregate terms. In their view, this re ected that the gaps that could be forming in the economy had not shown up de nitively in the labor market. 
Regarding the evolution of credit and nancial markets, one Board member noted that weak demand was also visible in the evolution of nancial markets, in low long-term interest rates, lower risk premiums, a credit slowdown and a depreciation of the peso in real terms. One Board member noted that credit was showing the effects of a marginally weakened demand and a somewhat tighter supply, that responded to a perception of increased risk in certain segments, which manifested clearly in commercial loans. One Board member held that aggregate credit indicators continued to show a path of normalcy, with more dynamic mortgage-backed lending and commercial credit beginning to lose strength. Although this had to be followed up, he thought that essentially the foregoing showed that the nancial system had properly accommodated the cyclical position of the economy. Furthermore, he concluded, the low interest rates both in the monetary market and at longer terms also re ected it. 
Turning to in ation, all the Board members drew attention to the upside surprise in April’s CPI. One Board member noted that the April gure was not only high but also con rmed an in ationary trend that ran above projections a few months back. In his view, this was explained by pressures on sales margins the economy was facing, which derived from both the effects of the peso depreciation —which was part of the cyclical adjustment of the economy— and the dynamism of wages. In any case, he continued, these phenomena should be taken as transitory, both because the effects of the currency depreciation on in ation should subside as time passed, and because the pressures on the labor market should also decrease as the economy’s dynamism became bounded. In his opinion, the evolution of in ation expectations was consistent with this assessment. Still, he added, clearly in ation gures and the signals that could be derived from them recommended greater caution in the interpretation of the data and in the Bank's actions. 
One Board member noted that, although the monthly in ation had been unexpectedly high, it was a temporary phenomenon, closely related to the depreciation of the peso. He added that, in any case, the increase in core in ation led to think that the short-term in ation dynamics would have an intensity and/ or persistence somewhat higher than projected, which could be traced back to the behavior of wages. Nevertheless, he concluded, the prevailing view was that the increase in in ation was transitory, considering the space provided by the slowdown in output and demand going forward. 
One Board member said that in this view April’s in ation was very important news, not because of the speci c number, but because it accumulated several months of higher than expected in ation, pushing the forecast for the year well above the assumptions in the March Monetary Policy Report. In his opinion, although a signi cant part of the increase in in ation had to do with the peso depreciation —which would imply a transitory effect on in ation— the fact that the increase looked somewhat broader than that could not be overlooked. 
One Board member stated that the higher in ation of recent months made him ponder whether more structural factors existed that could explain it, particularly tighter gaps or a higher pass-through coef cient. In his opinion, to assess the validity of some of these hypotheses it did not suf ce to see higher in ation in the short term. 
Regarding the monetary policy decision, all ve Board members agreed that the options presented were the most appropriate. One Board member said that in the present context, with easier nancial conditions, with a slower response from premiums, rates and aggregates, one should not overestimate the 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
expansionary impact that the market interest rate structure could be having on the economy. On the contrary, he added, said interest rate structure, along with in ation expectations around the target in the policy horizon, suggested that an additional monetary stimulus was needed. Accordingly, he believed that the monetary policy strategy described in the Report had to be implemented, and not overreact to short-term developments. However, also clear was the dif culty of properly communicating a decision of this type when the public didn’t expect it. Indeed, in his view, once the one-time effects on in ation dissipated, further cuts to the MPR might become necessary. 
One Board member noted that beyond minor adjustments to the MPR, the assessment was that the policy rate was consistent with the cyclical position of the economy. This assessment, he continued, should consider that recent developments could induce higher in ation dynamics in the near future. He added that the risks were bounded, citing that in ation expectations for next year were at 3%, but at least it should be noted that the assessment of the situation of available resource gaps and wage pressures was more uncertain than it seemed. Therefore, he concluded, for now the possibility remained that some adjustment to the MPR could be required going forward, but not as imminent as was believed some months ago and, therefore, more information was required before taking action. 
One Board member said that the option of lowering the MPR could be justi ed by the observed and projected evolution of output and demand. However, he continued, short-term in ation raised the need to proceed with caution to prevent a misinterpretation of the measures that would be taken. In addition, for purposes of the decision, it should be recognized that the current level of the MPR was not a limitation, at least not a severe one, for the process of adjustment or restructuring of growth to continue. From this perspective, it was worth bearing in mind also the relatively low level of the long-term interest rates and the cost of corporate nancing. Thus, there was no hurry to move the MPR and it was perfectly possible to wait for more information. 
One Board member said that the option to hold the MPR clearly dominated at this point. It was important to emphasize that the MPR had already been lowered by 100 basis points since October of 2013 and that long-term rates remained at particularly low levels. In addition, the costs of long-term nancing were at many years’ lows, and in some cases at historic minimums. In other words, there was already a quite signi cant impulse coming from interest rates. Moreover, in ation had exceeded expectations for several months in a row. This situation, which seemed to cover prices of products and services whose fundamentals 
were beyond the exchange rate component, demanded more caution. Thus, he believed important to note that the Bank would not let in ation expectations to become unanchored and would do everything necessary to prevent this. This was the best contribution that the Central Bank could make to achieve sustained growth. Besides, although certainly the slowdown of output and demand should reduce price pressures in the future, in a context where the monetary stimulus was already strong, where prices had risen above projections and in ation was outside the tolerance range, a reduction of the MPR this time could create the perception that the Central Bank was not so committed to the in ation target. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marshall, and Board members Claro, Vial and García, to keep the annual monetary policy rate at 4.0%. 
