MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary Policy Meeting No. 246, held on 18 May 2017. 
Present: Mario Marcel, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member; Rosanna Costa, Board member. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Solange Berstein, Financial Operations Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Financial Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Francisca Pérez, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Carlos Medel, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background minutes and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
Information received during the month and the primary analysis for the June Monetary Policy Report pointed at no signi cant variations from the March baseline scenario. About activity, both supply and demand data for the rst quarter were consistent with the weaker growth described in the March Report. Beyond the negative effects associated with mining downtime, this weakness had continued particularly strongly in some investment-related sectors, such as construction and business services and, to a lesser extent, in those relating to private consumption of non-durables and services, which had been growing at less than 2%. All these sectors also used to show a comparatively higher degree of persistence. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
Exceptions were some demand lines, closely related with imported products, including consumption of durable goods and investment in machinery and equipment, which had proved stronger than expected. This, together with over 5% annual growth in government consumption in the rst quarter, largely explained the slightly better GDP of non-natural resources sectors during the period. In the opinion of the Research Division, this was good news but did not imply a more favorable tendency in the recovery scenario, partly because of the rather temporary nature they attributed to some of the indicators. Also, because these lines affected GDP only moderately, considering its signi cant imported component. Finally, this positive news occurred within a context where other elements pointed at weakness as a risk. In particular, there were concerns about the poor performance of the labor market, as the households’ payment behavior towards banks was giving some signs of deterioration that could intensify during the year, according to the analyses leading to the Financial Stability Report of the rst half of 2017. This could be seen as a sign that households’ capacity to generate income was dwindling. 
Also in line with the March analysis, the evaluation of the external scenario showed that it would help to regain a stronger pace of growth towards the end of this year and into the next, which, coupled with the expected completion of the mining investment adjustment, a balanced macro-economy and a clearly expansionary monetary policy, allowed having the vision that growth would recover a pace consistent with the economy’s potential and the partial closure of capacity gaps towards the end of the projection horizon. Overall, the forecast was that the process of gap closing would be gradual, so demand-side in ationary pressures would remain bounded. 
In ation had behaved as expected, with an important slowdown of its tradable components and a more moderate adjustment of non-tradables. Preliminary forecasts for the Report suggested no major changes in the convergence trajectory. Thus, the general stance of monetary policy required for in ation to converge was no different from what had been estimated in earlier meetings, meaning that a mild expansion of the monetary impulse was needed in the short term and its gradual normalization as the economy recovered. It was worth keeping in mind that the baseline scenario considered a fall in short-term in ation and still weak activity in the months ahead. Thus it was also important that the current policy rate was consistent with further declines in these variables in the months to come. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Considering such scenario, two options emerged naturally: either to hold the policy rate at 2.75%, also keeping the expansionary bias, or to lower it by 25bp to 2.5%, with a neutral bias. The consequences of either decision, both of them consistent with market expectations, were of second order from the standpoint of projections. However, there were some differences in the messages that were worth taking into account. 
Lowering the rate while keeping a neutral bias meant to communicate more intensely that, given the current conditions, 2.5% was a oor for the rate. Of course, if new developments pointing in one direction or other became known, it did not mean that a quick shift in the course of monetary policy wasn’t possible. Actually, there was no rule impeding to move the MPR without previously changing the bias. On the other hand, the downside of lowering the rate and setting a neutral bias was that it could be construed as that unnecessary constraints were being introduced in the decision making process. Importantly, however, monetary policy was clearly expansionary already, with a real rate that would stand—if cut down to 2.5%—between 125 and 175bp below neutral. Furthermore, it was expected to remain low for a good period of time, as could be inferred from the Board’s working assumption and the market rates. This increased monetary impulse had been permeating market rates, in line with expectations, so the monetary impulse in the market and particularly in the curve, was appropriate. 
On the contrary, to hold the MPR at 2.75%, keeping the downward bias, left the discussion about how necessary it would be to change the impulse going forward open, both because if indicators improved maybe an additional cut would not be needed, or because an even bigger adjustment could be necessary. Degrees of exibility were also helpful, especially if the baseline scenario was not well settled. But there were also costs, as one could convey the feeling that excessive ne-tuning was being applied, placing too much weight in small MPR movements, above the overall orientation of monetary policy. Meanwhile, given the normal lags with which monetary policy operates, and the lack of accuracy regarding those lags, there was a cost in leaving monetary policy overly open. In particular, after successive decreases, it would help to create some space to check whether the effects of monetary policy were matching expectations. Such an evaluation would be cleaner if the market was told that a temporary time out was foreseen. Lastly, keeping the discussion open for too long about the right level for the MPR could result in over-reaction to short-term news. 
2. Monetary policy decision3/ 
Several Board members agreed that the external scenario showed no material changes from the last Report, and con rmed the signals of stronger growth in the developed world. Several Board members mentioned the volatility of nancial markets in the few days before the Meeting, which was a reminder that the identi ed risks were still totally valid. 
One Board member noted that capital ows into emerging economies had remained strong, but there was some concern about the impact that future decisions of the Federal Reserve (Fed) could have on them. In his opinion, the latest political turbulences in the US reduced the likelihood of very aggressive hikes, which could support some normality in the ows. In any case, he said, whether the recent developments in Brazil would affect those ows and how the markets valued the political risks was yet to be seen. 
One Board member noted that the visions of a massive scal impulse or a more aggressive policy by the Fed had reversed somewhat, which could have in uenced long-term interest rates. Thus, with the consolidation of external growth, the outlook for emerging economies remained favorable. 
About the local economy, several Board members thought that, broadly speaking, the scenario did not differ much from that outlined in the March Report. One Board member drew attention to the positive surprises coming from manufacturing and trade, together with not-so-auspicious business and construction services. On the demand side, consumption maintained a relatively stable expansion rate, while in investment, growing machinery and equipment, and contracting construction and works stood out. The risks to the consumption outlook were possible increases in arrears and the weak wage bill. One Board member noted that the low dynamism of the labor market re ected that, after a long time of slower growth, hiring plans were gradually weakening. 
One Board member noted that, on the one hand, there were more positive news, such as those coming from the components of durable consumption, investment in machinery and equipment, and some sectors trading abroad, such as the salmon industry. On the other hand, however, non-tradable sectors or services linked to the labor market had been slower. In that sense, he said, the downward revisions to real-estate investment and construction were of rst order. These 
3/ In order to preserve the regulatory individual anonymity in the discussion, all ve Board members are herein referred to as males, including female member Ms. Rosanna Costa. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
developments had a different interpretation in terms of persistence, because by de nition non-tradable sectors were more persistent, whereas tradables, e.g. durable consumption, had one-time-only inventory recovery components. 
One Board member said that slow growth owed signi cantly to strong temporary components, associated to mining activity and the one-time effect of the public sector strike late last year. Actually, in his opinion, there were many signs of recovery associated with consumption, especially durables, and investment in machinery and equipment, despite the fall in building investment, which was in uenced by the real estate cycle and weak investment in mining and infrastructure that should have some additional persistence. 
One Board member noted that consumption had been sustained by improved consumer expectations that offset the slowdown of the labor market. Investment had remained weak in important areas, particularly construction and infrastructure. By sectors, mining had remained weak, with longer-lasting and sharper idiosyncratic shocks, which had affected other sectors including electricity generation and business and engineering services. Trade had regained dynamism, while manufacturing had undone the losses of previous months. Thus, a scenario of weak activity tended to be con rmed, which had become especially marked between end-of-2016 and the rst quarter of 2017. Nonetheless, the scenario assumed that the improvement in external conditions, coupled with cycle-speci c factors like the evolution of inventories and the need for capital replenishment, would allow for a gradual recovery of the pace of growth beginning in the second half of 2017. 
About in ation, several Board members noted that in ation had continued to behave as forecast. Some of them said that the various measures of expectations were well aligned with the Report’s baseline scenario. Some Board members advanced that shortly there would be a signi cant fall in both headline and core in ation, especially the former, mainly re ecting the exchange rate impact. Also the widening of the activity gap, added another Board member. 
One Board member said that the mix of domestic and external factors had generated, beyond high-frequency data, a more stable peso-dollar parity which, when combined with changes in relative prices, pointed to a real exchange rate that was closer to its historic average. 
Turning to the analysis of the policy options, several Board members agreed that the proposals of the Research Division were valid. One Board member thought that keeping the benchmark rate at 2.75% with a downward bias was 
totally consistent with the information at hand, and, furthermore, it was what the market expected. It had the advantage that it allowed waiting for the closing of the Report’s analysis before sending signals of a at rate and it permitted to better calibrate the recent events in the markets. Although the option of cutting one quarter of a point while deleting the downward bias somewhat anticipated the markets’ expectations in their time dimension, it would not come as such a surprise, as it permitted to remove the bias and clarify the policy signals believed to be consistent with the macroeconomic situation. Precisely this was what led this Board member to lean toward the second option and thus give a more straightforward sign that the time had come to stabilize the MPR. 
One Board member noted that this time around, tactic or communicational antecedents tended to predominate. Among them, there were three factors he would like to discuss. First, using the expression “ oor” or “closing the process” could lead to confusion, as it could give a sense of exibility in only one direction, especially if stating a neutral bias. Second, it was important to note that a neutral bias entailed no “commitment” not to change the rate. Third, it was important to make the distinction between expected and unexpected MPR movements. If unexpected, pausing for a few months was necessary to evaluate the effects of such movements, in particular, if asset prices passed through to the markets, which would not happen if the movements were expected. Since the recent MPR movements had been close to what the market expected, what needed to be examined in the coming months was not the effects of the rate cuts, but rather exploring whether the medium-term in ation outlook and the overall macroeconomic environment were consistent with the baseline scenario. All considered, he voted for lowering the MPR with a neutral bias, provided that it did not affect the exibility to act in the months ahead. 
One Board member expressed some doubts about the need for a further monetary stimulus. In his view, the future looked somewhat better than the scenario depicted by the Research Division. As for the fundamentals of private consumption, the real wage mass was growing faster than a year ago, interest rates were lower and consumer con dence indicators showed some improvement. Banking credit also showed some recovery in its growth rates. He believed that these elements lent signi cant support to a continuation of the moderate dynamism of private consumption, with a steady improvement of non-durables and services consumption and a slowdown of durable consumption. This, coupled with a moderate rebound of non-housing investment, should suf ce to sustain a more solid recovery towards the end of this year and into the next, matching or somewhat exceeding the baseline scenario. He was for holding the MPR at 2.75% and to wait and see if the strengthening of consumer fundamentals 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
continued. Possibly, he thought, this would be more consistent with keeping the rate where it was and deleting the downward bias at this Meeting, although that could create some confusion without a more detailed analysis, which would be delivered in the upcoming Monetary Policy Report. 
One Board member stressed that monetary policy had reacted in a timely way to the downturn in the second half of 2016, anticipating a scenario of wider gaps and reduced in ationary pressures. Recent numbers con rmed this weakness, and the projections of slow recovery remained valid. Thus, the conditions that justi ed keeping a protracted monetary stimulus remained, waiting for stronger growth materializing in later 2016. In this context, the option of keeping the rate at was perfectly valid pending the collection of more information before considering the convenience of taking the rate down to 2.5%. On the other hand, according to the Bank’s internal projections, one additional reduction was within the reasonable space for the MPR in the baseline scenario. Activity remained weak and the persistence of low growth for a longer time could erode the strength shown by the labor market and consumption, which continued to be the main driver of growth. The risks and costs of delaying the recovery, which had already lasted for several years, could weaken labor market fundamentals more importantly, and since in ation expectations were well anchored, he favored reducing the interest rate at this Meeting. As a result, monetary policy would reach a very expansionary level and, considering the Bank’s and the market’s outlook for in ation and activity, it was most likely that it would stay at 2.5% for several quarters. 
One Board member thought it useful to sum up how economic conditions had evolved over the past year and the monetary policy response. With regard to activity, since the second quarter of 2016 the negative phase of the business cycle had intensi ed, which widened the activity gap by about one percentage point. In this period, core in ation also fell by about one percentage point. This suggested that the MPR should be around 100bp below the one in place in the rst quarter of 2016. As 75bp had already been cut, an additional 25bp cut would be justi ed to complete the adjustment of monetary policy. About the timing of the cut, he estimated that there was enough evidence to make the adjustment at this Meeting, because given the normal lags of monetary policy, pushing it back would risk missing the opportunity to reinforce the recovery of domestic demand and prices. Moreover, the prolonged slow growth had made the fatigue of nancial indicators visible. The higher volatility of nancial markets of the last hours, triggered by political events in the US and Brazil, should not detach the Board from the medium-term vision on which it should base its monetary policy decisions. At the same time, he thought that the monetary policy stance 
could return to a neutral bias, allowing the expansionary impulse to permeate the economy and gradually reverse the low numbers expected for CPI in ation in the following months. The June Report would provide a good opportunity to deepen the analysis of the foreseeable short-and medium-term evolution. This should not be an obstacle, however, for consistently monitoring those factors that could divert the economy and the in ation rate away from their expected trajectories over the monetary policy horizon. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Claro and Board members García and Costa, to lower the monetary policy rate by 25 basis points, to 2.50%. Board member Vial voted for holding the MPR at 2.75%. 
