MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY 
MEETING The monetary policy session N°198 was held on 16 May 2013. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board member; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Present as well: the Minister of Finance, Felipe Larraín. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Claudio Raddatz, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Market Manager; Luis Opazo, Financial Stability Manager; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Ivonne Vera, Senior Economist; Erika Arraño, Acting Executive Secretary of the Governor’s Cabinet; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Juan Pablo Rioseco, Communications Advisory Department journalist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s web site 2/. 
2. Options 
On this occasion, with the information gathered since the last meeting, the Research Division presented as relevant options to keep the monetary policy interest rate (MPR) at 5.0%, or to lower it by 25 basis points (bp) to 4.75%. 
Internationally, incoming information brought no signi cant change to the global scenario outlined in March’s Monetary Policy Report. However, the 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
receding prices of metals—particularly copper, which had fallen below the average forecast for the year—and the downward revision to growth prospects in China and other emerging economies drew special attention. 
Domestically, recent indicators showed that the rst quarter’s slowdown of output and demand had been somewhat faster than foreseen in the Report, while in ation had been lower. 
As for the monetary policy decision, the option of lowering the policy rate could be warranted by persistently low in ation gures and correspondingly low expectations, together with evidence that the projected deceleration of domestic output and expenditure and also credit was already happening. Still, as had been pointed out before, the accumulated dynamism of output and employment, combined with tight domestic markets, suggested that the recent low in ation rates were a temporary phenomenon that would be normalized within the policy horizon. Meanwhile, the recent decline in in ation expectations and nancial prices, which contradicted surveys, could be re ecting short-term effects from portfolio adjustments and thus were not necessarily signaling some change in expected prices. Notwithstanding, should these trends continue or deepen, such diagnosis could change. With respect to the evolution of output and demand, the recent deceleration was in line with the expected convergence to trend rates. Although this slowdown had been somewhat faster than expected, the available data was partial to allow inferring a change of trend in the economy’s velocity. In any case, the internal capacity situation remained tight as a result of previously accumulated growth, both by output and employment. This picture led, this time, to keep the monetary policy rate unchanged. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
All the Board members agreed in pointing out that the news of the month on the external front painted a picture of improved growth prospects for the United States and Japan, and that the Eurozone was clearly still in deep recession. Speaking of the emerging world, they noted that the signs of slowdown were spreading into other economies, as re ected by Chinese indicators. In this sense, some Board members stated that if growth rebalancing trends were to consolidate, the gap between growth rates in emerging and developed countries would be reduced. 
All ve Board members mentioned the drop in the prices of commodities, especially copper. One Board member noted that the favorable copper cycle 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
could be coming to an end. One Board member said that the commodity price trend could be resulting in somewhat more depreciated currencies in Latin America. 
When discussing international nancial markets, one Board member drew attention to the reduction in risk premiums and volatility, even in Europe, and stock market increases, especially in the United States. In his opinion, the abundant international liquidity was not owing into emerging markets yet, and noted that in Latin America, ows directed to variable income assets appeared to be declining, possibly shifting toward the more appealing stock markets in developed countries. 
Some Board members commented on the announced reductions of the policy rates by several central banks, underscoring that some of them explicitly mentioned the evolution of the exchange rate as part of the rationale for such decisions. 
Regarding the Chilean economy, all the Board members agreed that domestic output and demand had decelerated more than foreseen in the early months of the year. Still, they noted that the signs of slowdown were more intense in investment indicators, which according to one Board member were always more sensitive to the cycle. Some Board members noted that goods consumption showed no signs of deceleration yet, and that there was even the risk of renewed acceleration based on improved confidence indexes, sustained increases in real wages and even some partial evidence of stronger growth in banks’ consumer lending. One Board member said that although domestic demand was decelerating, it was adjusting less than GDP, so the gap between the two continued expanding, which should result in a bigger current-account de cit at trend prices. Several Board members noted the slower growth in sectors other than natural resources. 
One Board member remarked that it was natural to have doubts about how persistent the latest trends observed would be. There were still some con icting variables, such as consumer expectations and the still tight labor market. Accordingly, it was prudent to wait for more information, which did not imply reacting to one-time data. In any case, he concluded, it would be unreasonable to wait for total certainty, as by de nition monetary policy operates in uncertain scenarios. 
Beyond the volatility of many of the output, demand and in ation measures, one Board member said that evidence suggests that the Chilean economy may have moved past its cyclical peak. In the view of some Board members the 
Chilean economy was losing strength, more in line with long-term trends. In this sense, the baseline scenario depicted in the Monetary Policy Report con rmed its validity, although it was necessary to closely monitor the strength and sustainability of the adjustments taking place, because gures could be affected to some extent by temporary factors. One Board member said that, in any case, the risk of overly dynamic domestic demand had eased. 
Some Board members remarked the increase in corporate bond issuances internationally, which seemed to respond to the good nancial conditions prevailing abroad. Some Board members noted that credit continued to grow moderately and, in the opinion of one Board member, it was still marked by the prudent behavior of both creditors and borrowers. 
All ve Board members underscored the low in ation gures and the fact that in ation expectations were that it would be a long while before in ation would be normalized to 3%. This diagnosis, in the view of one Board member, ran independently of the methodological discussion on how the CPI is calculated. Some Board members noted in any case that expected in ation remained around 3% over the two-year horizon. One Board member added that expectations two years on derived from asset prices were below the target, which meant higher real interest rates and an undesired contractionary degree of monetary policy. 
Regarding the monetary policy decision, all the Board members expressed that, while the gures at hand justi ed analyzing the option of lowering the MPR by 25 bp, on this occasion the best decision was to keep it at 5.0%. 
In the opinion of one Board member, in light of the in ation indicators available it was reasonable to consider the option of cutting the monetary policy interest rate, but, he noted, it was still risky to move in that direction, because the more stable components of domestic demand were showing no clear signs of slowdown and there was even some risk of acceleration. 
One Board member argued that some elements of the deceleration had not consolidated yet and that it was necessary to deepen the conviction that other risk elements emphasized in this cycle (e.g. real estate developments), were retreating. In his opinion, there was some evidence of it, but it could be premature to begin lowering the rates without a deeper conviction that such phenomenon was taking place. In particular, he continued, because the majority of the market expected the policy rate to be held this time, which might complicate explaining a downward movement. It was evident, however, that in the coming meetings this option would have to be assessed more closely. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member noted that, per se, the assessment of the option of reducing the MPR was a signal to the market. However, he estimated that it was too soon to take action. In his opinion, adjusting the MPR required more certainty about the evolution of output and demand. For the time being, it was advisable to await more information. In any case, he concluded, if the observed trends were con rmed in the coming months, the policy reaction should not take long. 
One Board member noted that at the local level it was unclear whether the moderation of expenditure was purely temporary or rather permanent. While investment expectations showed some degree of slowdown, consumption indicators anticipated growth in household spending going forward. In this context, he noted, it was too soon to anticipate a slowdown in domestic demand considering the many times that some short-term indicators had indeed re ected a slowdown, but had been reversed later. In addition, this was occurring in a scenario where CPI in ation had been below 3% for a whole year, which made it hard to construe it as a coincidence of successive short- term events, as it had systematic elements. He went on to note that abroad several central banks had reduced their policy rates. He was surprised that some of them justi ed their decisions by the misalignment of their exchange rates, and probably other in ation-targeting central banks had also lowered the MPR partly motivated by this factor, without expressing it explicitly. Accordingly, he reiterated that in Chile there was insuf cient evidence of the business cycle, and even less of the spending cycle, to anticipate a possible reduction in interest rates, and rather this could be currently justi ed by a problem of relative prices. In this regard, it was necessary to have more evidence about the evolution of household, business and public sector expenditure, so further monitoring was needed. 
One Board member argued that lowering the policy rate by 25 bp was consistent with a still complex external scenario and very low actual and expected in ation domestically, together with slowing output and demand. Keeping the MPR unchanged was more in line with the dynamism that demand was still showing, especially consumption, and particularly with the risk of the recent slowdown— of both output and expenditure—being temporary and bouncing back in the short-run. A change in diagnosis entailed costs that needed to be reduced, although they could never be eliminated entirely, because the probability of a change in diagnosis was always present in monetary policy decision making. In addition, not changing the MPR was consistent with the view that in ation was temporarily below the target and gradually approaching it. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board members Marshall, Claro and Vial, to maintain the monetary policy rate at 5.0%. 
