MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary Policy Meeting No. 234, held on 17 May 2016. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member; Mario Marcel, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Rodrigo Valdés. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Mauricio Álvarez, Acting General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policy Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
All the indicators disclosed during the month, together with the analysis leading to June’s Monetary Policy Report, revealed a macroeconomic scenario that didn’t differ much from projections in March. Accordingly, and in line with the analyses in the latest Reports, additional increases were expected in the MPR before the usual projection horizon ended. As had been mentioned in earlier meetings, the pace of such adjustments to the rate would depend on incoming data and especially on its implications on the velocity of in ation’s convergence. The most recent output data had been mixed. On one hand, rst-quarter GDP had 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
signi cantly exceeded forecasts, with a surprise of nearly a full percent point in y-o-y growth, driven by the outstanding performance of the agricultural sector. On the other hand, short-term data showed a weak aggregate demand. Particularly worrisome was the further weakening of investment, whose outlook had been revised down again due to lower expected investment in mining and still poor con dence indicators. The labor market had worsened too, an expected development that was occurring somewhat faster than foreseen. In ation had dropped as projected, aided by the exchange rate which, with an important degree of volatility, had abandoned the upward-sloping trend that characterized it between mid-2013 and August 2015. 
As for the impact of these events on the in ation outlook, it was worth noting that its short-term evolution would continue to be closely linked to the US dollar. This was particularly important in the current conjuncture, because, on one hand, the nancial markets still expected action by the Federal Reserve Board (Fed), especially for 2017 onwards, which the Research Division judged overly passive and, on the other, doubts had increased about how sustainable China’s economic recovery would be. These two elements posed signi cant risk, as they were the main reasons explaining the constructive mood towards emerging markets’ assets in recent months. Actually, the variations in some asset prices days before the meeting attested to this, especially in connection with parities. The effects of these phenomena on medium-term in ation forecasts were not so evident, and would largely depend on how persistent they ultimately proved to be. 
As for other determinants of in ation at that horizon, despite the good results of the rst quarter, the Research Division’s assessment was that demand had weakened despite still high labor costs, which however were declining as expected. 
About the policy decision, the option of raising the MPR had been justi ed in that, in a context of persistently high in ation, the risk of seeing it converge more slowly than expected could validate a preventative movement of the rate aimed at reducing the probability of more drastic increases in the near future. As had been written in previous minutes, in a context where the latest Reports had included a string of downward revisions to the growth forecast, the real exchange rate showed no signi cant deviation from its fundamentals, in ation had diminished as expected, and in ation expectations had remained well anchored around 3%, such risk had lessened. Therefore, the Research Division estimated that, at this meeting, such option had lost importance. This did not mean ruling it out in the future because, in the most likely scenario, some 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
increase in the MPR was still pending in order to ensure that in ation would converge to 3% in the policy horizon. Thus, the Research Division believed that keeping the MPR at 3.5% dominated as the only possible choice this time around, given the information at hand. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
On the international front, all the Board members agreed that, with some nuances, the picture was consistent with the March Report’s baseline scenario and its risks. In particular, several Board members drew attention to the uncertain timing of the next policy rate adjustment by the Fed. One Board member said that the calm of nancial markets, which had translated into sustained increases in the prices of many nancial assets in emerging economies and of commodities, had been dissolving in recent weeks. The copper price had suffered a sharp correction, and the currencies of some emerging countries, like Chile, had depreciated. The situation of oil was quite different, as its price continued to rise. In this Board member’s opinion, if was dif cult to identify a catalyst for these movements, so one could not rule out that this was a simple re ection of these prices’ usual volatility. Early on, it had been stated that the relative strength of emerging currencies might not be properly re ecting its fundamentals, so maybe what was happening was a correction towards more cycle-consistent levels. Lastly, although the projected rise in the US policy rate had attened out again, doubts remained about the market’s possible reaction to an earlier than anticipated raise in the policy rate by the Fed. He went on to point out that if the movements in the copper price and currencies persisted for some time, this could have important implications in two directions. One, they were new reminders of the big challenges facing the emerging economies and that there were no clear signs of a faster recovery anytime soon. Two, it made it clear that the short-term in ation dynamic could remain volatile and subjected to the ups and downs driven by exchange rate uctuations. 
One Board member opined that the latest information coming from abroad tended to back the vision that the world economy was growing at the same pace as last year, recovering slowly in developed countries and signi cantly decelerating in the emerging world. Within this general context, one noteworthy event was the diverging trajectory of the prices of copper and oil. One possible explanation could be a sharper contraction of supply of oil than of copper, which if con rmed in the months to come would mark a more persistent divergence. He continued his intervention by stressing the domestic demand drop in South American countries. The well-known adjustments carried out in 
Brazil and Argentina had been coupled with less dynamism in Colombia and Peru, important markets for Chile’s relatively more elastic exports, so this was bad news in the short term. Overall, in his view, the main risks for our economy came from China and from a more aggressive monetary policy in the US than expected by the markets. 
On the domestic front, all ve Board members stressed that activity had outperformed expectations during the rst quarter. They also noted, however, that this did not alter the year’s projection much. One Board member said there were a number of indicators of a lower impulse for domestic demand over what remained of 2016. The slowdown of the wage mass due to the gradual weakening of the labor market would limit the expansion of consumption, while there were no signals of a recovery of investment yet. He added that this was rati ed with incoming data about the credit market, which featured a relatively weak demand for the low level of nancing costs. In his view, these elements allowed to predict that, even if GDP growth marginally exceeded forecasts, domestic demand would put no pressure on in ation during this year. 
All the Board members drew attention to the latest gures coming from the labor market. One of them said that they showed a deterioration that in some way made them more consistent with the low growth of the economy of the past two and a half years. It was to be expected that in the coming months the unemployment rate would post a moderate rise. A sharper rise would introduce an additional negative element into the macroeconomic scenario. One Board member noted that the Universidad de Chile’s unemployment gure had been downright bad, while the National Bureau of Statistics’, though weaker than in previous quarters, allowed pondering the situation of the labor market adequately. In his opinion, a scenario was forming where job creation would be poor throughout the year, owing to the weak performance of the economy and rms adjusting their hiring decisions, which so far had been absorbing the worsened growth prospects without affecting employment materially. Meanwhile, nominal wages remained dynamic, due either to the effects of in ation inertia or to the early signs of a further deterioration of the labor market. Moreover, there was no indication of a further adjustment of wages in the near future that would de nitely result in services disin ation. 
On in ation, all the Board members agreed that the evolution of recent months had been in line with March forecasts. One Board member argued that the details of the CPI’s behavior showed that core in ation indicators—for both goods and services—pointed in the right direction, suggesting that the in ation slowdown was a steady process that would continue to manifest itself in the 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
coming months. He added that the counterpart of this was an increase in the exchange rate to 690 pesos per dollar. However, he noted that its effects on future in ation were already largely internalized in the baseline scenario, or limited by the wider output gap and the distribution of the effect of the price pass-through over time. For this reason, he believed that no scenario had been con gured involving exchange rate pressures pushing in ation signi cantly away from its current trajectory in the immediate future. Still, he continued, internal and external risks persisted that could reshape the in ation scenario in the medium term, including signs of weakness in the Chinese economy, a bigger- or faster-than-expected adjustment of US interest rates, a further worsening of our terms of trade, or a weakening of the labor market and decisions to invest in Chile. Although not all of these scenarios put upward pressures on in ation, the Board should remain vigilant in monitoring the evolution of the macroeconomic environment where important elements of uncertainty persisted. 
One Board member noted that in ation could be expected to continue to gradually approach the target and get there in the rst half of next year. He said that risks in the external scenario were still present, which might affect the parity and thus have an effect on in ation’s pace of convergence and possibly result in new second-round effects. However, he thought it necessary for monetary policy to remain expansionary, to continue to provide the monetary stimulus that had allowed smoothing the business cycle. 
Turning to the monetary policy decision, all ve Board members agreed that at this meeting the proper choice was to keep the policy rate at 3.5%. About the bias, several Board members estimated that the background information was consistent with holding on to the statement of the previous meeting, namely that to ensure the convergence of in ation to the target, monetary policy would need to continue to normalize, at a pace that would depend on incoming information and its implications on in ation. In their opinion, this accurately conveyed monetary policy’s required orientation in a context of still high in ation. Meanwhile, the current wording of the bias was consistent with transmitting how exible monetary policy needed to be in the current context, where the probability of in ation taking longer than expected to converge was not negligible. Actually, one Board member noted that it was important not to dismiss the option of raising the MPR by 25bp, meaning that the baseline scenario assumed that the monetary impulse would have to be reduced at some point. However, he added, it could be put on hold this time to wait for new information on various variables and its effects on the in ation projections. 
One Board member expressed his decision to keep the policy rate at 3.5% and postpone de ning its future bias until the next Monetary Policy Report. 
He added that such analysis would require reconciling the short-term bias in a three-to-six-month range, with the rate converging to a neutral level within a medium-term horizon. He also said that the upcoming Report was the best instance to deepen the analysis on the medium-term outlook, the likely in ation trajectory and the orientation of monetary policy. At this meeting, the thing to do was to focus on the recent news coming from the macroeconomic and nancial environment and its implications for the Board’s immediate decisions, bearing in mind that the most important decisions about the medium-term policy bias would be made in the Report. 
One Board member noted that the only plausible choice at this meeting was to keep the policy rate at 3.5%. About the future path of the MPR to be speci ed in the Press Release, he said that a valid question was what the point of including the bias was. Here he singled out three aspects: rst, private expectations considered that the rate would be increased a couple of times within the next two years, suggesting a more stable path than foreseen last month. Including a bias based on this reason would point at a return to a neutral level towards the end of the horizon. But therefore a neutral bias would only be warranted whenever the MPR was at its neutral level, a very unusual event, and would convey no other information than a comparison of the MPR with its neutral level. A second possible reason was that in the process of drafting the Monetary Policy Report, the type of bias for monetary policy could be better assessed. This would be valid if the discussion leading to the Report envisioned a path for the MPR that would imply a faster return to neutrality than expected by the market. However, so far into the analysis it did not. Thirdly, a bias could be justi ed if the market perceived that the MPR might be raised shortly. In this respect, the latest Economic Expectations Survey indicated that less than 25% of respondents foresaw a rise within the next ve months. As a reference, in January this year, when there was also an upward bias, three quarters of the respondents expected one or two increments within the next ve months. In his opinion, the forward-looking content of the Press Release was very important. Preserving its informative quality relied on the bias depicting consistently monetary policy scenarios that were not only possible but likely. As he found an MPR hike hardly probable in the short term, and besides the Research Division had ruled out an increase, he thought it dif cult to justify including a bias in the Press Release. 
Another Board member said that at this meeting the right thing to do was to con rm what had been anticipated in the Report and hold the policy rate at 3.5%, but still reiterating that in the coming months there should be a smooth adjustment upward, as long as the macro scenario outlined in the Report remained valid. 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member noted that the assumptions leading to this meeting’s decision were not very different from those of earlier meetings. The fundamentals driving a drop in in ation going forward, as well as the reasons why the convergence would be gradual, still held. The idea of a faster convergence of in ation as a consequence of the exchange rate appreciation of recent months had to be assessed from a fair distance. Thus, in his opinion, the outlook included in the last Report, which had been con rmed in the last few meetings—characterized by a gradual normalization of monetary policy—was still valid. Anyway, he thought it important to stress that its timing and velocity would depend critically on incoming data and in ation projections. 
One Board member noted that the option of keeping the rate unchanged clearly dominated, because it was the most aligned with the current cycle of the economy, with the fact that the exchange rate had stabilized beyond its usual uctuations, and with still low international in ation. Also, and very importantly, it relied on in ation expectations two years ahead being well anchored to the target. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Claro, and Board members Vial, García and Marcel, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3.5%. 
