MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 240, held on 17 November 2016. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member: Pablo García, Board member; Mario Marcel, Board member. 
Present the Finance Undersecretary, Alejandro Micco. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Markets Division Director; Rodrigo Alfaro, acting Financial Stability Manager; Francisco Ruiz, acting Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister;Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
Of all background information, it was worth noting the downward surprise of in ation and the changes in relative prices occurred after the US election, especially higher long-term interest rates, both domestic and external. In ation accumulated a surprise of around -45 basis points (bp) with respect to assumptions in September’s Monetary Policy Report. Such surprise was explained by a 15-bp negative incidence associated with lower in ation of CPIEFE goods (that exclude foods and energy) and a 30-bp negative incidence of food in ation. CPIEFE services in ation and energy in ation had evolved in line with expectations. Output and employment data had also been in line with forecasts. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
Among the implications of the aforementioned events for the in ation outlook, some elements stood out. First, that compared with forecasts in the September Report, the short-term projection had been adjusted downward by somewhat more than the surprise itself. Second, that the lower core in ation had to do mostly with the effect of the exchange rate uctuations of recent months rather than with stronger downward pressures on the activity side. Actually, the biggest slowdown had occurred in the components with the greater pass-through from the exchange rate, while services in ation, more sensitive to activity’s behavior, had been in line with estimates. Third, that in a context where projected activity changed little and lower in ation was associated with the effects of the exchange rate’s stabilization, the Bank’s forecast models suggested that the effect of the in ationary surprise on medium-term projections was limited. Fourth, these developments indicated that, beyond changes in numbers, the overall view with respect to the evolution of in ation had not changed. In other words, that its variations had been linked mainly to the increase and subsequent stabilization of the exchange rate, which had affected mostly CPIEFE goods, while a bounded gap in a context of gradual slowdown of the economy had not put signi cant downward pressure on non-tradable in ation, and was not expected to do so in the medium term. Thus, although over the next few quarters a substantial fall was expected in in ation, over longer terms no signi cant pressures were foreseen in either direction on this variable. Finally, in ation expectations taken from surveys did not differ much from the Bank’s own estimates. Nonetheless, expectations derived from some nancial asset prices did show lower expected in ation levels, a situation that called for close monitoring, but considering also these indicators’ typical uctuations. 
A second event of the month worth noting was the increase in long- term rates, which had to do with a change in vision in global markets, associated with the effects that a more expansionary scal policy and a not-so-expansionary monetary policy would have on the U.S. economy and its spillovers on the rest of the world. That, for the moment, had resulted in increased risk appetite in developed economies and the opposite in emerging ones. About this phenomenon, it was worth noting, rst, that the increase in domestic long rates had been very signi cant, showing some of the sharpest movements of the last decade. Second, that, with the exception of the so-called taper tantrum, in recent years the movements of long rates in both countries had been strongly correlated. Third, that the levels of the rates were still low and below those of the rst part of the year. Fourth, that the movements, in both Chile and the United States, did not come from signi cant changes in the monetary policy rate (MPR) vision, but rather from term premium variations which before the increase were near record lows. Fifth, that at this point in time, it wasn’t easy to discern whether these facts revealed an adjustment of said premiums or 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
a trend that would continue in the coming months. The dif culty laid both in the fact that, in general, it was hard to explain the movements in the term premiums, and in the lack of clarity regarding the changes that the new U.S. administration would make or how would the central banks in other developed economies respond. Thus, the answer to the question of how these movements would affect economic growth and the in ation trajectory was not at all clear. Anyway, empirical evidence suggested that the negative effects on medium- term in ation and output of an increase in term premiums in the US could be signi cant. Lastly, it had to be noted that long-term interest rates in Chile and the US had been falling since the second quarter of this year, which the Report had connected with short-term nancial investments, and were expected to have an important impact on the exchange rate, but not so strong on activity. A natural question was, therefore, how much of these developments obeyed to a reversal of said phenomenon. 
In this context, the Research Division considered that the options presented at the October meeting, namely to keep the MPR at 3.5% or cutting off 25 bp, to 3.25%, were still valid. 
Arguments for lowering the rate included the need for a technical adjustment of the MPR to outweigh the effects of the lower in ation projected one year ahead. However, the analysis showed that this latter effect on the necessary MPR trajectory to ensure in ation’s convergence to the target was limited. In addition, the lower in ation forecast was mainly associated with the benign evolution of the exchange rate in recent months, a situation that was now more likely to change than it had been a month earlier. Finally, it had to be kept in mind that this option had its costs, because given the volatility of the in ation forecast one year ahead, reacting to changes in it risked introducing excess volatility into the MPR, reducing the clarity of the monetary policy communication. The option of lowering the rate could also be justi ed in that the probability of a scenario of weaker activity was signi cant, especially after the increase in long rates following the US election. Plus, the information at hand pointed at no big deviation from the forecasts in the Monetary Policy Report. 
The option of not changing the rate rested, in the rst place, on estimates indicating that, while acknowledging that the potential effects on output and in ation convergence of the aforesaid external nancial conditions might change this conclusion, the current impulse was appropriate, even considering the lower short-term in ation forecast. Second, it was not obvious the way asset prices, the exchange rate and interest rates would evolve in the next few quarters, which, given the low current levels of the rate, advised awaiting for more information before embarking on a change of gear in monetary policy. Finally, said option 
would not take the market by surprise, as it expected no movement at this meeting and, if anything, had moderated its vision of MPR cuts. 
Opposing the option was that if ultimately the scenario came true where to ensure the convergence of in ation further stimulus was necessary, not moving it now risked falling behind the curve. However, it was also true that this risk could be counteracted by more resolute action going forward. Finally, it was obvious that during the year in ation and activity indicators had shown a clearly downward trend and, if the Bank’s projections materialized, that trend would continue for some more quarters, even with in ation numbers that could be clearly below the 3% target for some time and with low activity levels in the rst part of 2017. This, per se, did not point at the need to change the MPR trajectory used as a working assumption in the latest Report, because these data marked no signi cant deviation away from said projections, or had no material effects on in ation’s convergence in the medium term. Moreover, the attening of the expected path of the MPR that had been input in the baseline scenarios of successive Reports, as well as the elimination of the upward bias, had precisely re ected the need to adapt the MPR trajectory to less dynamic activity and an in ation trajectory consistent with that scenario. In such context, in the absence of a change in the economic scenario suggesting a signi cant deviation from the medium-term convergence of in ation, it did not seem appropriate to communicate any changes in the general orientation of monetary policy. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
Regarding the international scenario, all the Board members agreed that the main news of the month had been the reactions of the global nancial markets to the outcome of the U.S. elections. They all highlighted the appreciation of the dollar and the rise in long-term interest rates. One Board member pointed out that while the increase in long rates had been almost entirely transferred to the Chilean nancial market, the depreciation of the peso against the dollar had been considerably more moderate than other emerging currencies. In his view, the plausibility of a change in the scal-monetary policy mix in the United States, and the greater uncertainty that would set in for some time, suggested that a return to low rates was quite unlikely, which in turn relied on expectations of low in ation and prolonged monetary expansion in developed countries. In these circumstances, he added, it remained to assess how contractionary the new international scenario for the Chilean economy could be, what factors were behind the greater stability of the exchange rate and what other factors, internal or external, could modify the scenario that was beginning to take shape. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board Member agreed that not all the necessary background information was available to identify the fundamental reason behind the signi cant increase in long-term interest rates, improved stock markets and higher metal prices, and a stronger dollar, but the hypothesis that the nancial markets anticipated a greater scal stimulus in the United States was suggestive. For the purposes of our monetary policy implementation, he continued, he thought that it was not right to want to be certain about this, since several quarters would have to pass for events to take place and, moreover, for its possible macro effect to materialize in Chile. For one thing, what was clearly observed was a signi cant increase in medium- and long-term risk-free interest rates in Chile —something that was shared by many economies in the world— and that the peso had not depreciated very signi cantly —something that was not shared by other economies. In fact, the level of the real exchange rate was similar to the one at the time of the last monetary policy meeting. In his view, these antecedents painted a picture of tighter nancial conditions, but without the short-term in ationary effect typically associated with exchange depreciation when external rates are increasing. In addition, historical patterns suggested that movements of this type and magnitude in Chilean rates should affect mortgage lending rates shortly, thereby also affecting credit and economic activity. Moreover, this would occur before any expansionary effect could be observed in Chile coming from, for example, higher commodity prices or a looser scal policy in the United States. Since there had been no signi cant movements in the exchange rate since the last meeting, the disin ationary effects of this scenario should dominate, ceteris paribus, as always, reaf rming the need to implement an additional monetary impulse. There was another element, namely the fact that the mortgage market showed some dynamics that could be exacerbated in an environment of higher interest rates. 
One Board member drew attention to the challenge of assessing the real impact of the new US Administration on the economic environment, noting that the reaction of the markets had been very strong. He added that it was complex to evaluate the permanence of changes in interest rates or currencies, among others, as well as to project future trends, especially because the new president’s inauguration was still several weeks away. However, it was clear that the adjustments mentioned were affecting agents’ decisions and would affect the future course of the economy. In his view, the new global scenario, which would be more clearly delineated in the December’s Monetary Policy Report, should include a greater scal stimulus in the United States, some protectionist actions directed especially towards Asian countries, and some relaxation in nancial regulations in the US, as well as in the environmental constraints facing manufacturing activities, particularly in the energy sector. The markets seemed to have interpreted this as more public debt issuance and increased in ationary 
pressures in the United States, explaining rising rates and capital in ows to that country. However, he added, it could not be ruled out that it could also be re ected in the commodity markets, where a greater supply of fuels by the United States would hold down those prices for some time. Although the price of copper had risen sharply —something that had already begun to occur a few days before the election— it was in contradiction with the course of interest rates and the dollar, so it seemed reasonable to assume that it would be transitory. The most direct impact in this scenario was not necessarily adverse for Chile. In any case, he continued, although higher long-term interest rates took a toll on aggregate demand, it was also true that this responded to an expectation of stronger growth in the United States and possibly to more in ation there, which could have positive effects on the demand for exports and, possibly, on the price of copper. In the nal balance the impact of this scenario on the group of emerging countries, particularly China, had to be substantial, which should tone down the existing optimism. Beyond the considerations about the direct economic effects of the new US Administration’s macroeconomic policies, the range of possible scenarios in the economic and political realm had undoubtedly widened, necessarily translating into greater uncertainty. 
One Board member noted that it was hard to draw any important or decisive conclusions from asset price movements, but the idea of greater in ationary pressures was consolidating in the US, together with big increases in long-term rates in the US and other economies, Chile included. In this regard, he made three points. First, during the last few months or quarters the Chilean economy had been facing lower in ationary pressures, mainly due to the prospect of a stable and marginally appreciating peso. This was due to the expectation of more favorable nancial conditions, which, in his view, lent support to activity in the medium term. The current scenario suggested a change in this, and if a scenario of higher rates in the world consolidated, especially if linked to reduced risk appetite, it could mean a clear deterioration in the external conditions facing the Chilean economy, which should be carefully input into the Bank’s evaluation. Second, in the short run, pressures from long rates and exchange rate movements might introduce some volatility into this scenario of sharp declines in in ation in the earlier part of 2017. In any case, this was secondary, because monetary policy and the assessment of the monetary impulse had to be anchored to the medium-term outlook. However, it was necessary to adequately consider the magnitude of the shock and the capacity and room to adjust domestic monetary conditions in this new scenario. In his view, the current conditions in terms of the dynamism of activity, the labor market, scal policy and internal and external interest rates did provide room, but that was bounded for the time being. Third, the events of recent weeks allowed evaluating from a healthy distance the assumption of so-called secular stagnation, whose 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
fundamental implication has been this perspective of low growth, low in ation and low neutral rates in a very persistent way. In his opinion, this view was based on good fundamentals, but market movements of the past few days somehow tempered the expectation of very low rates for a very long time in the world and could therefore recon gure the levels of the rates in the various countries, an important issue calling for attention. 
One Board member stressed that a number of questions had arisen regarding US scal policy, in ationary pressures, monetary policy and others that would have effects on the world economy. Interestingly, after a long time, in ation was again being talked about, even though there was not enough clarity about this and other effects. He added that the Fed was set to continue its normalization process in December, which was already internalized by the market and would follow a gradual process. The greatest risk, from the shortest-term nancial perspective, was to consolidate and/or deepen the decompression of long rates’ term premiums. This would be transmitted to other economies, many of them emerging, which would be contractionary. Of course, this would have to be countered with the possible scal impulse, which would be expansionary. He also noted that the positive and somewhat surprising increase in the copper price had partly mitigated the effects on the exchange rate and, if sustained, would help mitigate the longer-term effects. 
On the domestic front, all the Board members highlighted the new surprise in monthly in ation. One Board member emphasized that the surprises of September and October combined re ected quite widespread cumulative effects on the different categories of goods and services. In addition, available projections con rmed that this fall in in ation was not a one-off event, but rather a change in trajectory that, incorporating the indexation mechanisms and the likely evolution of other relevant variables, would extend well into next year. This would translate into annual CPIEFE in ation being near 2% until the third quarter of 2017. 
One Board member commented that, taking only the news at hand before the release of October’s CPI, there was a scenario of in ation reduction much faster than had been foreseen in the September Report. This was attributed to an effect, perhaps greater, perhaps anticipated, of the exchange rate’s stabilization that had begun in the rst half of the year. This, of course, is a one-off effect, but its true impact had been signi cant, and the possibility that some of the usual indexing clauses of early next year also re ect this situation. With this, CPI in ation would hover around 2.5%, while that of the CPIEFE would be around 2% during the rst half of 2017. He noted that these projections did not differ much from what could be derived from private expectations or asset prices, 
nor were they contradictory in their monetary policy implications with what those same private expectations contemplated for the next months, meaning a policy rate standing a little below its present level. 
One Board member stated that, according to the background information presented, the in ationary surprise was due mainly to the relative appreciation of the peso and its possible side effects on indexation, and, therefore, was re ected in a transitory decrease in the in ation forecast. This was in line with market expectations, which pointed to in ation around the target in the projection horizon. However, the recent depreciation of the peso, should it persist, would point to in ationary effects in the opposite direction. 
One Board member noted that the breakdown of the accumulated in ationary surprise revealed speci c elements about which it was dif cult to propose a structural interpretation, but it also revealed that the exchange rate effects had been greater than anticipated. The data suggested that this was within the parameters that could have been expected given the stabilization of the peso after the strong depreciation over two years and also incorporating the marginal appreciation observed for much of this year. He added that, broadly, output and demand data were in line with forecasts, a particularly important antecedent, because, beyond the existing uncertainty, it could be concluded more credibly that the explanation of the in ationary surprise had a lot to do with the trajectory of the exchange rate rather than with a further or sharper deterioration of the economy. Anyway, this Board member mentioned that in ation numbers were an important input, because when combined with gures for output and demand, had driven a downward revision to the risk balance for in ation. This allowed recognizing that, if some of the tendencies deepened, some adjustment to monetary policy could be needed in the coming months, but still limited under the assumption that the economic slowdown would not intensify during 2017. 
Some Board members noted that the recent approval of a moderate and prudent adjustment for the public sector was guarantee that scal policy and wages would not be a source of imbalance nor an obstacle to monetary policy making in 2017. 
About the monetary policy decision, one Board member said that two elements were necessary in weighing the options raised by the Research Division. First, the degree to which the sharper deceleration of in ation was driven by demand- side factors vis-a-vis supply side ones; and second, to what extent the recent developments in the world economy could balance out or deepen these trends. On the former, it was worth noting the asymmetry that began to appear with respect to in ation’s accelerating phase of 2014 and 2015. In that period, the role of the exchange rate depreciation was especially evident inasmuch as 
5 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
in ation rose despite the domestic demand slowdown. In the current phase, meanwhile, the reversal of in ation had been particularly abrupt, without a peso revaluation equivalent in magnitude to the previous devaluation, and with a signi cant and growing output gap. Thus, it was expected that annual GDP growth would decline towards the rst quarter of 2017, as would in ation. At the same time, a change in the in ation trajectory was contemplated for the last quarter of 2017, grounded on the stabilization of the exchange rate and an acceleration of economic activity as from the middle of the year. In his opinion, the second element was particularly relevant. Would it be possible for the incipient changes in the external scenario to validate the expected trajectory of the Chilean economy in 2017, by limiting the in ationary deceleration and the values necessary for the MPR? or rather, was it more likely that external factors would deepen and extend the present trends? The inclusion of all these elements in the analysis could be carried out more appropriately and with more information in the next Report. Pending this analysis, it seemed prudent to keep the MPR at 3.5%. However, he thought it advisable to state more clearly that there was a change in the trend of in ation compared to estimates in the September Report and that it would be extended for at least three consecutive quarters, since this was a factor that could affect the future monetary policy decisions, especially if accompanied by a more adverse external nancial scenario for the Chilean economy. 
One Board member noted that all the data combined pointed quite clearly to a high probability of having to increase the monetary stimulus shortly. In tactic terms, the only argument not to do it at this meeting was that it was not expected. He added that these expectations were the result of the Bank’s communication itself, which could possibly be remedied transparently with a downward bias. In any case, since there were no impediments to acting more aggressively if so required, he did not think that including a bias was a necessary condition for future policy actions. 
One Board member stressed the importance of reaf rming that monetary policy decisions were based on the medium-term trend of in ation and its determinants. Deciding exclusively on the grounds that the scenario was not going to change and that every event was transitory would be very naïve. Nor did it seem prudent to mechanically extrapolate the recent hikes in the dollar and interest rates to a new in ation scenario. Fortunately, he added, these turbulences came at a time when the policy rate and also the long-term interest rates were still expansionary and in ation expectations were within the allowable range in the projection horizon, so adjusting now the MPR was no urgent matter. 
One Board member commented that indicators reviewed led to vote for keeping the policy rate at 3.5%. In his view, the internal gures for in ation and activity opened a space to seriously consider a downward adjustment in the MPR. But, in any case, the data available at the moment suggested that this adjustment was quite smaller and not very different from that of the prices of the nancial assets then in effect. In his opinion, without downplaying the adjustment, this reduced the severity of the change required in the policy trajectory. Anyway, the market’s reaction to the US situation was yet to be seen, which was subject to many interpretations, with different implications for monetary policy. A priori, he said, he favored the view that this would tend to deteriorate the nancial conditions facing the Chilean economy, although there were also other more favorable hypotheses that could not be ruled out. Thus, considering the current level of the MPR, he did not believe that to signal changes in the orientation of monetary policy was justi ed this time. 
One Board member said that the options raised were reasonable. Lowering the rate was based on in ation being more contained, the economy continuing to grow below potential and the contractionary effects of the consolidation of an environment of higher term premiums. The option to maintain the rate was based on the view that the decline in in ation was very recent and the analysis did not show signi cant decreases in the projection horizon, that services in ation remained above 4%, capacity gaps were narrow and would widen only slightly more and then would start to close, and nal demand had grown somewhat more than expected, in both consumption and investment. However, it was undeniable that incoming information increased the probability of needing a more expansionary monetary policy in the near future. In particular, due to the new in ationary surprise, not the surprise per se, but because it might be indicating something more permanent due to the rise in long rates, which, if persistent, might have contractionary effects. It should be noted, however, that in the latter case it was more dif cult to compensate with monetary policy, which did not imply that it should not to be attempted. In any case, he added, it was very important to note that monetary policy was expansionary and was expected to remain so. Moreover, it was evident that this expansiveness had helped to smooth the business cycle. On this he wanted to share some thoughts. First, from time to time, voices were raised calling for the use of monetary policy for exchange rate purposes. In his opinion, except in extreme cases and only under certain circumstances, which were far away, this was not a good idea. Not only would the Bank move away from the in ationary target and cause to lose credibility, but seeking to have any signi cant effect on the exchange rate would require an adjustment of such magnitude that it could cause no small damage to the rest of the economy. He added that in recent years the Bank had remained 
6 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
faithful to this principle, despite suggestions to the contrary. The actions of the Board, when in ation was rising driven by the rise of the exchange rate, i.e. the adoption of a more expansionary monetary policy, were a clear sign of adherence to this policy. Of course, if second-round effects were perceived, the situation changed —and some of that had been seen at the end of last year. Second, what was important was expected in ation in the projection horizon, not current in ation or whatever would happen in the short term, which, by its very nature, was very volatile in Chile. In 2013 and 2014 the rate was lowered even though in ation was above the target and rising, because it was estimated that these were one-time effects and that the rise in in ation would be temporary. The fundamental variables pointed to a greater monetary accommodation and the Bank acted accordingly. Symmetrically, if today in ation should fall below the target, this alone would not be reason for a more expansionary policy. Actually, this was expected —in ation to fall— due to lower pressure from the exchange rate, but monetary easing could only be increased if said lower in ation were accompanied by lower medium-term pressures. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Claro and Board members Vial, García and Marcel, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3.5%. 
