MINUTES OF THE 
MONETARY POLICY MEETING The monetary policy session N°192 was held on 13 November 2012. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board member; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Rodrigo Cifuentes, acting Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Claudio Raddatz, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Financial Market Manager; Luis Opazo, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Consultant Manager of Communications; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
1.1 Brie ng 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, can be accessed on the Bank’s website1/. 
1.2 Background analysis and comments 
Commenting on external matters, the apparent contradiction between the evolution of indicators about China ́s economy and commodity prices—especially copper—was discussed. While output indicators for this major consumer of copper suggested that the slowdown of previous months had come to a halt and was even showing some improvement, the copper price had relapsed during the month. It was also noted that growth rates of world trade indicators were rapidly approaching zero, which could be signaling a recession in the making. 
1/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
Regarding the domestic scenario, the discussion focused on the dilemma posed by strong output and demand indicators vis a vis bounded in ation. It was argued that persistently low interest rates in the developed world, within a context of dynamic output and demand in Chile, were pushing toward a widening of the current account de cit, with an exchange rate appreciation and tighter output gaps, with higher in ationary pressures. 
2. Options 
On this occasion, with the information gathered since the last meeting, the Research Division proposed as the relevant option to keep the monetary policy interest rate (MPR) at 5.0%. 
Recent developments did not signi cantly change the external scenario outlined in September’s Monetary Policy Report. The outlook for world growth was fairly unchanged, although the difference in the performance of the Eurozone and the other regions had increased. 
External risks remained. The situation of the Eurozone was still fragile, the possibility persisted of a drastic scal adjustment in the United States, and only China showed some better signs, which however contrasted with the drop in commodity prices in the last few weeks. 
Domestically, incoming information showed an acceleration of internal demand, due to stronger private consumption and machinery & equipment investment. This had been re ected in higher output growth, but it also showed the impulse from natural resource related sectors. This growth pattern would imply a widening of the current account de cit as measured at trend prices. 
In this picture of several indicators showing strength, the slower growth of banking loans over the past two months stood out, an aspect that called for further analysis to comprehend its coherence with the other variables. 
As for prices, the unforeseen gures of headline in ation in the past two months also re ected greater contribution of foodstuffs, mainly perishables. Core in ation, excluding energy and foodstuffs, had been somewhat below forecasts of the last Monetary Policy Report, at 1.9% y-o-y in October. These positive surprises in some speci c prices had not affected medium-term in ation expectations. It is worth noting that the moderate evolution of core in ation in a context of narrower output gaps, both in the productive sector and in the labor market, was also a factor that needed further follow-up. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Accordingly, holding the MPR at 5% was thought to be consistent with the required monetary stimulus to align actual and potential output, as estimated in the last Monetary Policy Report. 
As in earlier occasions, the option of lowering the monetary policy rate could be warranted as a preventative measure considering the risk of a steeper slowdown of economic growth and in ation, which could occur if the external risks described in the last Monetary Policy Report materialize. However, the probability of these scenarios had not increased and it could even be argued that the risks associated with a sudden deceleration of the economy were now milder. Meanwhile, recent data showed still strong domestic demand and related indicators, still favorable nancial conditions, which did not anticipate an imminent slowdown in domestic demand going forward. Thus, lowering the MPR was not the best option this time, the same as in the previous month. 
The option of raising the MPR was also ruled out this month. Such a decision could be warranted in response to the recent dynamic of domestic expenditure, posting high growth rates despite the worsened external scenario. This dynamism of expenditure could end up tightening conditions in domestic markets and creating the setting for stronger in ationary pressures in the near future. 
However, incoming information suggested that the acceleration of growth in the output of non-natural resources sectors, more closely linked to the price dynamic, had been somewhat milder, contrasting with domestic spending. And, as aforesaid, actual and expected in ation indicators had remained in values consistent with meeting the in ation target. 
The option of keeping the MPR constant was justi ed by its current level being within the range of neutral values, which allowed time to wait to accumulate more information about the external scenario’s evolution and its impact on the Chilean economy. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
All ve Board members coincided that, broadly speaking, news of the world economy were in line with the trends of earlier months and forecasts in the September Monetary Policy Report. All the Board members mentioned their fears of an excessive scal adjustment in the United States, although tempered by incipient signs of willingness to negotiate an arrangement. One Board member noted that, in his opinion, what was at stake was not so much a worsening of the U.S. nancial crisis but rather a drastic cyclical adjustment. One Board 
member added that, overall, for the time being the risks of a bad outcome and a severe scal adjustment seemed to have decreased. 
About the situation in the Eurozone, all the Board members coincided in the persistence of risks. One Board member mentioned the signs of weakness in the region, because while this was nothing new, it was relevant as nancial tensions could become more pronounced should the economic deterioration deepen. One Board member drew the attention to the fact that other economies in the region that so far had looked more resilient were also weakening. One Board member noted that after the announcements of the European Central Bank brought some optimism to the markets, doubts about the likelihood of a resolution have arisen, aggravated by numbers revealing a bigger than expected contraction in economic activity. 
Regarding the other economies, one Board member highlighted the case of China, whose gures have shown a more stable growth rate and some signs of improvement in recent indicators. He added that, in any case, this information must be read with caution because it is dif cult to elucidate its implications on the strength of the Chinese economy. In addition, other indicators, such as commodity prices, had taken a dip recently raising doubts about how to read the latest gures coming from China. One Board member brought about the case of South Korea, whose sovereign spreads had improved remarkably in the past few weeks, as had those from China, re ecting a more positive evaluation of their economies. He noted that before, the two had or faced marginally higher interest rates than did Chile, and now their interest rates were below those of our country. 
On the domestic scene, all the Board members noted the strength of domestic demand and output. One Board member noted that although part of such strength could be re ecting temporary events associated with the calendar effect and increased capital expenses in these months, today a sustained deceleration of these variables was not all that clear. Some Board members noted that, aside from a few minor issues, domestic demand continued to show substantial strength, as did output although to a lesser extent. This explained the pressures on the current account that were building up. One Board member added that some evidence from labor market pointed to a more severe shortage of labor. 
Some Board members noted that, despite stronger demand, there was some degree of deceleration in credit growth. This, they added, seemed to respond to the application of somewhat more stringent standards and policies at the banks. And lower credit growth was something to take seriously, because in periods of expanding demand, higher nancial risks are associated with very high increases in debt. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
As for in ation, all the Board members agreed that headline and core in ation were still in line with the tolerance range of the in ation target, despite stronger output and demand. One Board member noted that core in ation seemed to be fairly well contained. In his view, this owed partly to negative tradable goods’ rates, affected by the exchange rate developments. Nonetheless, it was also true that services in ation showed no signi cant signs of an acceleration of cost and wage pressures. He noted that this was an issue to be monitored, because it helped understand the cyclical position of the economy. One alternative, he continued, was that in ationary pressures could be present, but postponed by a compression of margins, which could be consistent, for example, with a recent deterioration of corporate results. But, on the other hand, he drew attention to the divide between the dynamism of product and employment or hours worked, which could be consistent with increased gains in productivity and more dynamic wages without further pressures on in ation. 
One Board member drew attention to the fact that tight capacity had not translated, so far, into in ationary pressures. In his view, the strength of demand had been channeled through imports without compromising the in ation trajectory. Overall, he added, incoming data led to think that the probability of very low y-o-y in ation for a long time had diminished. Accordingly, he concluded, the in ation outlook continued to pose signi cant risks for the medium term, bearing in mind that the economy had continued to grow above trend. 
One Board member noted that the strong dynamism of output and expenditure had not translated into pressures on prices and, in fact, beyond the high CPI in ation of October, core in ation was still near the lower bound of the tolerance range. He also recalled that in recent months the opposite situation had occurred, with lower than expected in ation rates. Therefore, he noted, it was important to mention the principle that monetary policy decisions were not made on the basis of speci c data. Moreover, in ation expectations over the policy horizon were still in line with the target. 
When referring to the monetary policy decision, all the Board members coincided that the information at hand continued to point to the convenience of keeping the MPR at its current level. One Board member noted that it was dif cult to assess a different option, since the MPR was in a neutral position and that risks remained fairly balanced. He added that one important fact reinforcing the option of not changing the MPR was the recent behavior of the banking system which, although it continued to provide support to the economy’s growth, it appeared to have introduced some elements of prudence in its lending decisions. 
One Board member noted that the Chilean economy was facing a complex situation, considering that, while the world economy was weak, with low interest 
rates, our economy was strong and its interest rates were in the neutral area. Plus output had continued to grow above trend. Although these estimates contained some degree of uncertainty, it was reasonable to expect that if some form of further tightening of domestic markets occurred, the Chilean economy could show some symptoms of overheating, whether through in ationary pressures or in a deteriorated current account. This concern was re ected in the Bank’s communication about the developments of the current account and the balance of payments. Accordingly, this posed a dilemma, because there was no clarity on what would be the appropriate policy mix to face an exacerbation of such conditions. What was clear, he concluded, was the importance of coordinating the policies of the Central Bank and the Ministry of Finance. 
One Board member pointed out that the apparent paradox between the performances of expenditure and in ation was probably related to domestic expenditure increases being diverted abroad, which re ected in both the current account balance and the evolution of the exchange rate. In his opinion, in the months to come it would be necessary to pay close attention to these variables, in order to ensure that they do not move to ranges that could make the Chilean economy signi cantly more vulnerable, which was not the case for the moment. He concluded that any action in this direction would require close coordination between the Central Bank and the Ministry of Finance. 
One Board member noted that the monetary policy was still at the crossroads where it had been in the past several months. On one hand was the still weak external scenario, with record-low international interest rates, which could have stronger effects on the national economy than seen so far. On the other hand was the very dynamic domestic scenario, with a milder than expected slowdown and even some marginal acceleration. Actually, facing a weak external scenario, the national economy had been dynamic thanks to the impulse of domestic demand. In his opinion, the greater demand was translating into a widening of the current account de cit, but without any in ationary effects, at least for now. On the contrary, core in ation was still very low. Based on this information, holding the MPR constant was the best option. Raising it was inconsistent with the delicate external situation, and lowering it was incompatible with strong domestic output and demand, which could imply in ationary risks in the future. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board members Marshall, Claro and Vial, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 5.0% (annual). 
