MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 216, held on 18 November 2014. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Enrique Marshall, Vice-Governor; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member. 
Present the Finance Undersecretary, Alejandro Micco. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Francisco Ruiz, acting Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Alfredo Pistelli, Senior Economist; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
News received during the month revealed an external scenario where the divergence between the US economy and most other developed countries had widened, and emerging economies had weakened. A number of factors had intensi ed the downward pressures on the prices of several commodities, especially oil. Although the episode of increased volatility in October had moderated, it was likely that going forward more volatility would be seen in the nancial markets and the US dollar would strengthen more markedly. Nevertheless, the international scenario relevant for Chile was still relatively favorable and not very different from the one depicted in the last Monetary Policy Report. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
Domestically, third-quarter data and early fourth-quarter indicators con rmed the sharp weakening of the economy that had been in the discussion for some months. Thus, growth would end 2014 in the lower part of the forecast range proposed in the last Report. 
Although the economy had behaved within expectations for the last few months, it was important to recognize that during October the growth outlook for 2015 had been revised further down, while the various business and household expectations surveys showed no signs of improvement. In this context, investment continued to decline beyond expectations, especially in its machinery and equipment component, but also in the more persistent component of construction and other works. 
It was still premature to elucidate the future implications of the worsening of the local economic outlook on the economy’s capacity to regain strength in 2015, on the evolution of output gaps, and on the velocity of in ation’s convergence to the target. However, a preliminary analysis suggested that the current monetary impulse was consistent with in ation returning to the desired level within the usual projection horizon. 
During the last month, the most signi cant piece of news was undoubtedly the in ation rate, which had taken the market and internal projections quite by surprise, at 5.7% annually. Thus, in ation had completed seven months above the upper bound of the target range, and both internal and market estimates thought this could go on for a while. Accordingly, in ation would end the year somewhat above 5%, i.e. around one percentage point more than the estimate in the September Report. This would be the second time this year that a major correction would be done to the year’s in ation estimate, since the June Report had made a similar correction to in ation at December 2014, from 3% to 4%. 
However, it was important to acknowledge that the nature of the last surprise was different from that examined in the June Report. Back then the in ationary surprise had been widespread and responded rather to the fact that the scenario which assumed that the cyclical conditions of the economy made it likely for certain negative in ation surprises early in the year to be persistent had not materialized. This time, conversely, the larger part of the in ationary surprises of September and October had been associated to one-time events that in many cases had to do with concrete exogenous phenomena, whose effect on the price level should reverse or not occur again. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
In line with the above, core in ation had been less volatile: October’s gure had been 4.1% annually and the internal projection was that it should not exceed that number in the coming months. Meanwhile, in ation expectations remained anchored around the 3% target. 
Thus, and despite the magnitude of the in ationary surprises, the data did not signi cantly alter the vision of Chile’s macroeconomic picture with respect to the last meeting. 
However, and as had been discussed in the Options Minutes of last month, the high in ation gures of recent months posed big challenges to monetary policy conduct, since it was obvious that they could jeopardize in ation’s convergence to the target. This, both because of the possible associated second-round effects and the possible increase in medium-term expectations—not yet observed—and because it could not be totally ruled out that this high in ation was re ecting a deeper cause that could not be identi ed with the information at hand. 
Over this latter point, the dif culty in measuring output gaps was certainly a signi cant element. While it was evident that the economy had been growing below potential for quite some time already, widening the gaps, it was important to recognize that estimating them was a dif cult process, full of uncertainties. In particular, it could not be ruled out that these gaps might be smaller than estimated, as suggested by some labor-market indicators. Thus, it was all the more valuable to gather information that would allow for a better analysis of this hypothesis, a task that will be part of the research input of the next Monetary Policy Report. 
Overall, the Research Division was convinced that this month’s indicators con rmed the need to continue to provide a substantial monetary stimulus to the economy, to achieve convergence of in ation to the target. Thus, the option of withdrawing some stimulus seemed irrelevant in this discussion. Meanwhile, the risks entailed by the high in ation gures of the last few months, together with the fact that it was far from obvious that the economy needed further monetary stimulus, led to disregard the option of further cuts to the policy rate. 
Thus, the Research Division proposed as the only possible option to keep the MPR at 3.0%. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
About the external scenario, all the Board members noted the dichotomy between the US economy on one side, and the Eurozone, Japan and the emerging world on the other. While the US showed stronger signs of dynamism, the others were weaker. Some Board members commented the drop in the oil price, which according to one Board member seemed to have more structural characteristics. 
One Board member pointed out that regarding the external scenario, a vision had consolidated that was somewhat less favorable than a few months before. Although the nancial markets had calmed down somewhat after the latest episodes of volatility, several risks remained, most notably the potential effects of the monetary policy normalization in the United States. This was compounded by the debilitating nancial position of several emerging economies. For the time being, this re ected in the prevalence of low interest rates in advanced economies—particularly, in those that were safe havens for investors—and in a stronger dollar. 
All ve Board members agreed that the main news of the month came from the local economy. They noted that output and demand indicators, especially for investment, showed quite weak performance. One Board member noted that the last Imacec had con rmed once again that the economy was going through a phase of very slow growth, which had turned out to be more persistent than expected. Accordingly, this year would end near the lower end of the growth range forecast of the last Report, and the outlook for next year did not look very auspicious. He added that the private sector had already made signi cant revisions to forecasts, and that expectations of business and consumers, beyond the movements of the last month, were all very depressed and the task of reversing the trend looked very challenging. 
The in ationary surprise was also present in the arguments of all the Board members. Several of them mentioned that it was an essentially temporary phenomenon. One Board member said that in any case what was evident was that the problem existed and that in light of the surprises, especially regarding the CPIEFE, a careful review to internal projections and models was called for. Along the same lines, one Board member said that annual in ation persisting above the target range for several quarters was cause for concern, and thus had to be monitored closely. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member expressed that of all the possible explanations to understand the sharp increase in in ation, the dominating one was the major depreciation of the exchange rate and its impact on the price level. He noted that due to external developments such as the outcome of an expansionary monetary policy and a domestic demand adjustment, the economy had reacted with large adjustments in relative prices. This was a desired outcome and partly an objective of monetary policy. Thus, he concluded, the high in ation rates, aside from important one- time effects on the price level, re ected precisely this exchange rate adjustment. As long as output and demand would continue to be weak, or at least grow at a slow pace, in ationary pressures would ease, especially if the new episodes of exchange rate depreciation turned out to be moderate. 
One Board member noted that in ation had been signi cantly higher than expected in recent months, and was now higher than both the market’s and internal forecasts. He added that that this variable had been above the tolerance range for many months already, a situation that would last for several months more. Although the gures obviously did not satisfy the Bank, the diagnose remained that in ationary pressures should ease in the medium term, because gaps were being generated in a scenario of low growth and weak demand, plus the low international in ation and the drop in commodity prices, particularly oil. So, the in ation surprises of recent months would lead to a new upward correction to the forecast for the year, and should prompt a revaluation of some of the key variables of the medium-term in ation trend. In particular, he said, in evaluating the output gaps it was crucial to look into the labor market, wages, and the pass-through from the exchange rate depreciation to prices, among other indicators. Anyway, this was being done increasingly. To wrap up, he estimated that in an environment of sharp adjustment of relative prices like the one occurring now in Chile, which called for a major reallocation of resources across sectors, the measurement of the output gap became still more uncertain. 
Turning to the monetary policy decision, all the Board members agreed that although the month’s developments had not been free of surprises, taken together they were consistent with the overall orientation of the present monetary policy. 
One Board member recalled that the next Report would allow revising the con guration of the baseline scenario, but he thought there should be no qualitative differences with the general outline of the previous Report. This was an important macroeconomic adjustment process, with a real depreciation and a signi cant reduction of the current account de cit, which owed to both domestic and external reasons. It could not be overlooked that monetary policy had fostered and accompanied this adjustment, helping to limit the associated 
costs in terms of labor-market indicators. Towards 2015 one should observe a faster pace of economic expansion together with a decline in annual in ation to the center of the target range. The Central Bank’s process of making monetary policy decisions was systematic, he noted, so whatever was decided at this meeting had to be also consistent with the last communiqué. He recalled that in October they had advanced toward a more neutral bias in monetary policy. He saw no recent indicators modifying the vision that that decision had been correct. 
One Board member agreed that the only relevant option this time was to keep the MPR at 3%, because raising it to address a potential in ation outbreak was unwarranted in the current conditions; lowering it after the in ationary surprises would be very dif cult to explain and could jeopardize the credibility of the Central Bank’s commitment with the in ation target. 
One Board member opined that the in ationary effects of the exchange rate depreciation showed that the monetary policy had been quite expansionary, as con rmed by various measures of monetary and nancial conditions. In this sense, there were certain limits to the contribution that monetary policy could make to continue to stop the deceleration without putting the in ationary goals at risk. Therefore, he thought that the information analyzed at this meeting demanded some caution in policy making. The decision was taken in a context where the Central Bank had communicated a neutral bias in its monetary policy, when annual in ation was substantially above 3%, and prospects of recovery in the coming quarters looked gloomy. So, he concluded, the current levels of the policy rate and in ation clearly lent support to the decision of keeping the MPR unchanged, in order to evaluate more closely the in ation trajectory in the medium term and how next year’s output trend could affect in ationary pressures and the exchange rate. 
One Board member said that it was dif cult to think of a policy option other than holding the MPR. A decision to raise it would be completely extemporaneous, and a decision to lower it would not be prudent considering, among other elements, the level that short-term in ation had reached. The option of holding it was consistent with observed developments, especially when processed jointly. For all these reasons, he thought it best to pause for a while, which in any case was consistent with what had been communicated lately. The preparation of the upcoming Report would be a good opportunity to update projections and review the strategy. He drew attention to two other points: rst, that this was the decision the market expected, and second, that the MPR was at a perfectly reasonable level for the state of the economy and the risks identi ed. Both elements reinforced the convenience of not innovating this time around. 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member argued that monetary policy had acted coherently with the stage of the cycle the economy was going through. The MPR had been cut drastically to take it to 3% annually, which entailed a signi cant monetary stimulus. Long-term interest rates were still at record lows. As monetary policy acted with lags, it had been appropriate to give this boost to the economy, something that had begun more than a year ago already. In fact, the rst communications in this regard were from the rst half of 2013. Today, raising the MPR was inconsistent with the country’s present stage of the cycle so, in his opinion, it was not a relevant option. True, in ation was above expectations, but everything pointed to a normalization in the short term, to return to the tolerance range in the second quarter of next year. Moreover, he continued, in ation rates below 3% in the second half of next year should come as no surprise. Lowering the MPR with the current in ation was also unreasonable for an institution whose target was way below the present gure. In this sense, it had to be made clear that this did not mean looking back to the past, but being aware that a risk existed of inertia or in ationary transmission. The traditional uncertainties about the output gap, with this level of in ation and with the clearly expansionary stance of monetary policy, also called for caution. Therefore, he considered that the decision to remove the expansionary bias at the last meeting had proven without a doubt to be the right thing to do. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marshall, and Board members Claro, Vial and García, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3%. 
