MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary Policy Meeting No. 228, held on 12 November 2015. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member; Mario Marcel, Board member. 
Present the Finance Undersecretary, Alejandro Micco. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Ricardo Consiglio, acting Financial Operations Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
Generally, the data known during the month had been in line with projections in September’s Monetary Policy Report. Abroad, the main news had been the positive dynamics of the labor market in the United States, reaf rming a relatively optimistic vision about the recovery of the US economy and signi cantly increasing the probability of the Federal Reserve Board (Fed) starting to withdraw the monetary stimulus at the end of this year. The baseline scenario of the September Report assumed that this process would begin by year’s end, that it would be gradual, and that the Fed would succeed in implementing it without causing any major disruption in nancial markets. Thus, for as long as it would cause no big changes in the prices of other assets, this should not alter the 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
trajectory proposed for the monetary policy rate (MPR) in Chile. Nonetheless, as had been thoroughly debated on previous occasions, this situation was obviously not free of risks, which if occurring might call for actions other than the ones planned and, therefore, had to be monitored very carefully. 
On the domestic front, third-quarter output had been in line with forecasts, thanks to improved performance of non-natural resources sectors, which compensated for poorer than expected mining results. The labor market continued to show signi cant resilience in both job creation and wages, while aggregate demand, excepting a few speci c elements, re ected cautious but stable behavior of consumers and investors. Local and external conditions were still adequate to support a recovery of the pace of growth to near potential levels towards the second half of 2016. 
Despite a decline in October, annual in ation remained high and was expected to hover above the tolerance range at least through the rst half of 2016. Behind the stubbornly high in ation were the successive depreciations of the peso, which had prevented tradable goods in ation from returning to lower numbers, closer to its historical performance and, moreover, consistent with persistent low external in ation. Another contributing factor was non-tradables’ in ation remaining high driven by, among other things, second-round effects derived from past in ation, the greater indexation of some components of this category, and output gaps which, though negative, remained bounded, as could be inferred from the various measures presented at this Meeting and the performance of the labor market. Finally, October’s headline in ation had been in line with projections, although core in ation —the CPIEFE— had been unexpectedly high, a situation that was foreseen as persistent. 
Thus, incoming data con rmed the analysis presented in the Report, in particular that for in ation to converge to the target it was necessary to withdraw some of the monetary stimulus in place. Such conclusion had been well internalized by the market and surveys, and nancial asset prices revealed an expected path for the MPR that was generally consistent with that analysis. 
In this context, the Research Division considered that the relevant options for this discussion were to keep the MPR at 3.25% or to raise it to 3.50%, but estimated that the information reviewed favored the option of keeping the rate at 3.25% with an upward bias. Keeping the MPR at 3.25% with an upward bias was, on one hand, consistent with the need to continue to gradually reduce the monetary stimulus and, on the other, being—on average—in line with market players’ expectations, helped to boost the predictability of monetary policy—a much appreciated feature, especially in a context of monetary policy tightening. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Meanwhile, although the data were consistent with a scenario of gradual recovery of activity during 2016, the downward risks for medium-term output were still present, because of both the sluggish recovery of domestic con dence levels and the state of the global economy, where doubts remained about the future of China and some emerging economies in the region, together with possible disruptions associated with the Federal Reserve’s policy rate normalization process. 
The option of withdrawing the monetary stimulus more intensely than estimated, by raising the MPR by 25 basis points and keeping the upward bias, was not to be ruled out. Monetary policy was highly expansionary, as was evident when contrasting the policy instance in real terms with that of other comparable economies. In addition, non-tradable in ation had exhibited a signi cant degree of persistence, causing the necessary adjustment of relative prices to occur against a backdrop of higher than expected in ation. Plus that internal projections saw the convergence of in ation as strongly associated with the stabilization of the exchange rate, which if not happening might put pressure on in ation because of not only its direct short-term effects, but also second-run effects that would trigger an increase in in ation persistence. Finally, the recent surprise in CPIEFE could be not only a forecast error, but rather a re ection of somewhat stronger in ationary pressures. 
Despite these important considerations, according to the Research Division, there was no clear evidence as yet to justify a sharper reduction of the monetary stimulus than had been stipulated in the September Report. For one thing, these were the same arguments that warranted the reduction of the monetary stimulus proposed in the Report, and there was no evidence that they might have intensi ed in recent months. For another, although it was considered that the conditions for a gradual recovery in activity towards the end of 2016 were present, the economy had been growing below potential for quite some time, substantially limiting the risks of in ationary pressures in the usual projection horizon. Finally, the discussion and analysis leading to the December Report provided the appropriate framework to reassess the implications of these and other developments in the evolution of in ation. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
About external conditions, one Board member noted that the scenario outlined in the last Report was tending to consolidate, that is, a relative strengthening of the United States, and—to a lesser extent—Europe, plus a slowdown in emerging economies which, in some larger countries like Brazil and Russia, had turned into a recession. The postponement of the start of the Fed’s cycle of policy rate hikes 
had mitigated the risk aversion and capital out ows from emerging countries, a situation that could change depending on the decision the Fed would make in its December policy meeting and the messages it would deliver. He added that maybe the sole aspect where there was a signi cant deviation from the Report’s baseline scenario was the drop in commodity prices, particularly for copper, which was a re ection of both a weakening of demand, especially in the emerging world, and the strengthened dollar. In his view, if these forces persisted, the recovery of these prices would probably be delayed, despite the production cuts applied. 
One Board member mentioned that what was most noteworthy about the last month’s news were the employment gures in the US and the prospect of the Fed raising the policy rate in December. He added that, up to a few weeks back, the markets foresaw that such decision would be put on hold until well into 2016, pushing the prices of the riskier assets in emerging countries up, and appreciating their currencies. The latest gures had rapidly reversed those tendencies and re ected signi cant adjustments in their currencies and interest rates. This expected policy normalization in the US, however slow, together with a stronger monetary impulse in Europe, as had been announced by the Governor of the EBC, signaled upward pressures on the dollar. In that sense, he felt that the risk that this pressure on the dollar could signi cantly alter the trajectory of commodity prices, the exchange rate and the in ation outlook, had to be monitored closely. In the same vein, one Board member said that it was natural for the international economic debate of the coming weeks to be dominated by the possible policy rate hike by the Fed. And it was also natural to expect volatility and the pressures on asset prices, especially in emerging economies, to be linked to the divergence of monetary policies in the developed world. 
One Board member stressed that the external scenario should continue to be monitored very carefully, since therein lied the main possible deviations from the growth and in ation scenario that the Bank had outlined, which could have the greatest implications on monetary policy, in either direction. 
One the domestic front, all the Board members agreed that in the last month the main macroeconomic variables had matched the scenario depicted in the September Report. One Board member added that, even though some indicators, such as durable consumption, imports of machinery and equipment and expectations in the construction and manufacturing sectors, showed marginal improvements, they were still only incipient in an overall context of weak demand, relative pessimism of economic agents and in ation driven by cost- push pressures coming from the exchange rate. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member added that the drop in mining output had been offset by somewhat stronger domestic demand, re ected in other sectors’ GDP growth that marginally exceeded previous estimates. This had been possible, he continued, at least partially, because of the continued strength of the labor market, which had lent support to private consumption. About in ation, he noted that there were no major surprises and was still in line with projections and, if this continued, should be re ected in increased annual gures in the coming months. 
One Board member stressed that in ation had been somewhat above the forecast, but overall it was consistent with estimates in the Report. He said that core in ation—CPIEFE—had been slightly higher and it would probably remain so in the coming quarters which, in his opinion, rather than reshaping the scenario, con rmed the concern about the persistence of core in ation, especially for services, considering that the labor market seemed relatively tight. Services in ation was still dynamic, and he thought it would remain so for some time, absent a sharp deterioration in the labor market, a development not contemplated in the Bank’s baseline scenario. Turning to activity, this Board member noted that the data at hand suggested that the growth forecast for 2016 had to be revised downward from the September Report, but mainly due to lower than assumed mining output. All in all, he concluded, other sectors’ indicators continued to grow within a range of 2%-2,5%, a pattern that should not change signi cantly in the coming quarters. 
One Board member stressed that core in ation had surpassed expectations, which could mean that headline in ation could be more persistent. He also noted that the projection for annual in ation between December this year and April 2016 was still near 5%, ratifying the risks in this variable. Furthermore, high in ation rates were still expected, particularly from January onwards. Overall, he added, in ation expectations in the projection horizon remained anchored to the target. About output, this Board member drew attention to its change in composition, with a shift in the dynamism of natural resources towards other sectors. In his view, this was good news, because the latter was more closely related with more endogenous elements that operated with greater lags. Finally, labor market developments were better than expected, as job creation remained strong and the unemployment rate, low. Anyway, he continued, it was still premature to risk projecting a more permanent improvement in economic performance. Although expectations had improved marginally, they were still pessimistic and the projections for the fourth quarter this year and the rst quarter of 2016 were that output would remain weak for some time. Moreover, risks on growth still seemed biased downwards, and it was necessary to bear in mind that the scal impulse would be smaller. 
As for the monetary policy decision, all ve Board members agreed that the options proposed by the Research Division were valid. One Board member noted that a look into the main factors that could affect in ation in the coming months rati ed that the conditions depicted in the last Report continued to hold. On one hand, demand pressures were weak. The available indicators con rmed that both consumption and investment remained depressed. The Government had given clear signs that the scal impulse would be moderated in 2016, while corporate indicators pointed at adjustments in employment levels and wage costs over the coming months. Accordingly, regardless of the size of the output gap, it looked that it would not be reduced anytime soon. Meanwhile, the peso depreciation was still the main factor behind the increase in in ation over the last year and a half, and it was possible for it to lose some strength in the next months, for two reasons: one, because of the relatively more stable nominal exchange rate in the last three months, and two, because of some early signs of a compression in companies’ margins, as documented in the last Business Perceptions Report. Another factor was that in ation expectations, beyond the particular difference between expected and actual in ation in October, remained rmly anchored in 3% in the monetary policy horizon. Lastly, the evidence examined showed no indication of a signi cant increase in risk taking resulting from the search for yield in a scenario of protractedly low interest rates. The most salient movement, that of escalating real-estate prices, seemed to be responding to tax and regulatory factors rather than to a potential bubble. However, the dynamics of the real-estate sector had to be constantly monitored, not only for prices and funding. This Board member added that one could not ignore that December could bring important news from both local and external sources that could help delineate the behavior of markets and expectations. On one hand, a possible policy rate hike by the Fed, coupled with the response to the signs of deepening and extending the monetary impulse in Europe, would mark the behavior of the main currencies of the world. On the other hand, it would be important to verify the direction scal policy would take after the approval of the public budget, the behavior of the corporate sector’s margins and whether consumer and business pessimism would ease. Therefore, it seemed that the best thing to do was to keep the MPR at 3.25% and wait for this new information to come in before taking the next step in the process of normalizing the monetary stimulus. 
One Board member noted that the key element to decide in favor of one policy option or the other was the analysis of whether or not the scenario assumed in the last Report was still valid, which, in his view, was so, beyond the volatility of the monthly gures. Economic activity remained on a gradual growth trend, in ation remained high, re ecting the effect of the depreciation of recent quarters, and the labor market continued to show resilience. Anyway, he added, 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
it was worth noting that, from the standpoint of non-mining components of both production and investment, the outlook tended to be not so gloomy as in previous months and quarters. Thus, in this context, and with the scenario of gradual normalization of the monetary stimulus described in the Report, he thought it pertinent to wonder if the right thing to do was to immediately deepen the process of monetary impulse withdrawal begun the previous month, or rather put it on hold for some months. In his view, the most important element this time was the communicational implications of either option. Raising the MPR meant that the timing of a further rise in the MPR had to be stated clearly, or even more so, with respect to the grounds on which such measure had been based. He said that, this was the kind of strategic aspects of the monetary policy conduct that were assessed to input in the Report’s projections and that could hardly be communicated simply after this meeting without causing confusion. On the other hand, if the MPR was kept unchanged, it would be possible to convey in no uncertain terms that the normalization would continue in the coming months, for example with one or two more rises, an issue that could again be clari ed and explained when calibrating the Bank’s forecasts and communicating them in the December Report. Thus, he was more in favor of the option of keeping the MPR where it was, and the same with the bias in the Communication. 
One Board member recalled that the Report’s baseline scenario had assumed a partial and gradual withdrawal of the monetary stimulus over the coming quarters. Thus, and as the underlying scenario had generally been maintained, the decision to raise the MPR now or later was a tactic one. Since the market agents’ expectations had come closer to the Report’s vision and, accordingly, assumed that the next hike would occur further ahead, he thought it wiser not to take the public by surprise, since that could cause confusion. Therefore, he voted for holding the MPR at 3.25%, with an upward bias in the press release. 
One Board member said that the indicators available warranted a path for monetary policy in line with the estimates of some months ago. This meant two main things: One, that monetary policy should remain expansionary in the near future; and two, that gradual adjustments to the MPR would be required in the coming quarters. This could translate into a short-term increase in the MPR, while additional moves might be needed well into 2016. Studies leading to the next Monetary Policy Report would deepen this analysis, but in his view, with the background information available he did not think that the implications of monetary policy in the new Report would differ much from today’s conditions. Hence, the decision of this meeting was consistent with this context. Thus, he thought that the issue was not deciding if, but rather when, the MPR would have to be raised, and the consistency with the communication that the Bank 
had had with the market in recent months. Raising the MPR this time around could be justi ed in that although the Report’s baseline scenario had been right on the mark in general terms, the upward in ationary risks in the short term remained in full force. This time, however, he preferred to maintain the message that the MPR would need to be raised gradually in the baseline scenario. In fact, he thought that raising it this time could be construed as a sign of a more aggressive move than was desirable. Thus, he favored keeping the MPR, maintaining the upward bias. 
One Board member stressed that raising the MPR for the second month in a row was consistent with a more persistent in ation and the higher pressures observed in core in ation. Also with the resilience of the labor market and somewhat stronger non-natural resources’ GDP. Moreover, as had been noted on numerous occasions, the monetary stimulus in Chile was among the highest—if not the highest—among emerging economies, and it was necessary to gradually withdraw some of the stimulus. Finally, the risks to in ation also appeared to be biased upwards due to its persistence, plus possible shocks that could affect the exchange rate. 
Moreover, the option of holding the rate steady was based mainly on keeping monetary policy on the path described in the last Report, in a scenario that, in broad terms, had not changed much. Also, in the conviction that the withdrawal of monetary stimulus would be gradual and that—so the Board felt—monetary policy would remain expansionary still for some time. Plus, the output gap was forecast to remain negative or even mildly expand in the coming quarters, thus reducing the likelihood of in ationary pressures from that side, although its size did not suggest that any signi cant disin ationary effects were building up. And last but not least, a gradual return of in ation to the 3% target was expected over the policy horizon, a vision that was shared by the market. Of course, this entailed a gradual withdrawal of the monetary stimulus in place. Although the moment was approaching in which a second step would have to be taken towards such gradual withdrawal, it seemed reasonable, because of the aforementioned reasons, not to make the move that day. Therefore, he voted in favor of holding the MPR at 3.25% and maintaining the tightening bias in the press release. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Claro, and Board members Vial, García and Marcel, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3.25%. 
