MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary Policy Meeting No. 252, held on 14 November 2017. 
Present: Mario Marcel, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member; Rosanna Costa, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Nicolás Eyzaguirre. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Solange Berstein, Financial Operations Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Markets Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Financial Markets Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Kevin Cowan, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Carlos Medel, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background minutes and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
The data received after the last meeting, as well as early analyzes of the December’s Monetary Policy Report, tended to con rm the baseline scenario, the identi ed risks and the evaluation of last month. Thus, it was con rmed that the economy remained weak, especially construction-related sectors, which re ected in below-potential expansion rates. This, in spite of the fact that domestic demand was growing more strongly, driven mainly by the demand for imported goods. In ation had been unexpectedly high in October, partially undoing the previous negative surprises. On this occasion, the surprise had occurred in some core items, with which in ation excluding foods and energy 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
(EFE) was in line with September forecasts. Headline in ation, on the other hand, remained below projections, owing mainly to the atypical behavior of the prices of fruits and vegetables. 
The external scenario had evolved somewhat better than expected in September, especially because of the terms of trade. The price of copper had remained above the projected values, partly offsetting the higher international price of fuels. Beyond some recent reversals, nancial conditions continued to favor emerging economies and the more synchronized recovery in the main economic blocks continued its course. This scenario, together with an economy without signi cant imbalances, internal expectations that continued to improve and an expansionary monetary policy, led to reaf rm the projected recovery of the growth pace towards 2018. Thus, the preliminary projections of the Monetary Policy Report indicated that the initial output gap was somewhat more negative, but that, nevertheless, assuming slightly higher quarterly rates next year, the gap should close more or less at the same speed as thought in September. This was important, since the evolution of in ation depends more on the gap’s expected trajectory than its initial value. 
In this context, it was foreseen that in ation would gradually converge to 3% within the projection horizon, although at a somewhat slower pace than previously estimated. This was true for both headline and core in ation. Regarding the latter, the revised projection was not related to lower actual numbers —actually, EFE in ation had been in line with the projection—, but was a result of the appreciation of the peso and its effect mainly on tradables. In headline in ation, the differences were greater, because it factored in the negative surprises of the last months. These deviations did not entail themselves any large impacts on medium-term in ation. Added to this was that the baseline scenario considered closing gaps —ultimately the main determinant of medium-term in ation— which, together with the expected real depreciation of the peso towards its long-term values over the projection horizon, helped in ation to converge in the baseline scenario. 
Regarding the risks for the convergence of in ation, a special concern remained that, in a context of low medium-term in ation expectations and still weak growth, it could be delayed. This could occur due to both the effect of the accumulation of shocks on in ation via indexation, and its incidence on the formation of expectations. Both paths could be strengthened if monetary policy failed to react adequately, as the lower expected in ation could affect real interest rates, thus depressing demand. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
In this context, the options proposed in the past few months were still valid. Speci cally, either to keep the MPR where it was or lower it by 25 basis points (bp), bringing it to 2.25%. Holding the rate at 2.5% was consistent with the monetary policy strategy associated with the baseline scenario, i.e., maintaining the momentum until the activity indicators showed more clearly that the output gap closing process had consolidated. This was linked to the assessment that the shocks that had diverted in ation from its foreseen path were temporary and that neither they, nor the fact that some measures of in ation expectations two years out remained below 3%, would signi cantly affect the process of price formation. 
About this, there were important doubts surrounding both the correct measurement of in ation expectations and its impact on the price formation process. Although a number of nancial-market-related indicators showed a persistent deviation of expected in ation at two years horizon from its 3% target, other measures, such as those aimed at addressing a broader spectrum of sectors (such as the Economic Expectations Survey, EES) and those intended to correct possible distortions in the reading of market prices, failed to do so. However, it should not be overlooked that the deviations of some measures of expectations had already been in place for a long time which, coupled with low in ation projections for several more quarters, particularly for its EFE component, constituted a signi cant risk scenario. This was especially important considering the possibility of negative surprises coming from activity and the limited knowledge about how in ation expectations are generated. 
All in all, a scenario where the recovery seemed to have consolidated in the margin and where there was a clear signal not to begin normalizing the MPR until the economy showed a more solid rebound, limited the possible negative effects that low in ation expectations could have in the process of price formation. In that sense, the materialization of the recovery of the growth pace remained a crucial element for the convergence of in ation, both because of its effect on the output gap closing and because of the negative interaction that negative surprises in activity would have with still low in ation expectations. 
As had happened before, boosting the monetary stimulus rested mainly on a risk management argument. Due to the considerations mentioned in past meetings, under this scenario a change of more than 25bp could be necessary. With variable intensity, two factors had crossed the discussion about the risks in the convergence of in ation in recent months. First, the possibility of a strengthening of the peso that was not coupled with a faster closing of the gap, at least in the short term, which could be associated with the fact that risk appetite in the global nancial markets remained high. Thus, although it was reasonable to 
expect that eventually there would be coherence between the real value of the peso and the state of the local and external cycle, at shorter terms there could be situations that could ease some in ationary pressures, increasing real rates, which in a context of still weak activity and low in ation and medium-term expectations, could negatively affect the convergence of in ation. It was worth noting that with respect to the level of the real exchange rate, recent estimates did not see any signi cant deviation from its level believed to be consistent with its fundamentals. Second, as had been discussed in the previous meeting, all the in ation surprises combined could negatively affect the convergence of in ation, due to both indexation effects and their impact on expectations. 
Against the option of lowering the policy rate, it had to be recognized that it was dif cult to communicate MPR changes based on minimizing risks. This, not only because they implied changes in the policy stance that did not re ect a signi cant change in the baseline scenario, but also because if no such risk scenarios came true, the extra stimuli had to be quickly removed. In any case, unlike other occasions in which the Bank had been at similar crossroads, the distance between the current and the desired MPR in the baseline scenario was short in a couple of years ahead. Therefore, this reversal, if any, would not be so big. 
Finally, one of the main concerns raised in the October meeting —the increase in real interest rates— had been steadily dissipating. In particular, the rates had returned to levels near those in the September’s Monetary Policy Report, which, although somewhat higher than in June, went hand in hand with lower risk premiums. Thus, the evaluation was that monetary policy had not become less expansionary since the last Report, which had been an important risk a few weeks back. 
2. Monetary policy decision3/ 
Several Board members noted the upward in ation surprise of October. One Board member said that this gure had come, to a large extent, to offset the surprises in the opposite direction of previous months, without signi cantly altering the in ationary outlook. He added that, in his view, this reduced the probability of a prolonged scenario of low in ation that could signi cantly alter the convergence of in ation to the target. One Board member mentioned that an 
3/ In order to preserve the regulatory individual anonymity in the discussion, all ve Board members are herein referred to as males, including female member Ms. Rosanna Costa. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
in ation scenario was taking shape where core measures were in line with the forecasts of recent months, while other components —especially foodstuffs— explained the lower observed headline in ation. One Board member stressed out that the high volatility of in ation called for a prudent and alert attitude, forcing above all to weigh the trends over marginal gures, especially when evaluating the data of September and October. One Board member noted that the current low in ation scenario had not been signi cantly altered by October’s CPI in ation. He stressed that the short-term projections had only been corrected by the equivalent to a third of the surprise, which could indicate that the downside risks to in ation were still as present as they were last month. 
One Board member said that, after discounting the effects of in ation’s volatility of the past two months, various measures of breakeven in ation and in ation expectations had returned to previous levels, however some medium-term measures were still somewhat below 3%. Meanwhile, real interest rates at different maturities —for both bonds and swaps— had undone almost the full increase experienced after September, and were at levels little above those of mid-year which, in some way, coincided with the improving trend of the growth outlook for 2018 and 2019 that had begun in June. 
One Board member pointed out that in the last month the downside in ationary risks have been subsiding, though not disappearing completely. In his view, this was the outcome of both a new in ationary surprise, now in the opposite direction, and a trajectory for the economy that had remained within the foreseen scenario, while a better external scenario had consolidated. He stressed that, the in ation expectations two years out did not change much and that the market curve postponed and reduced the probability of an MPR cut for a relatively short period, probably dominated by the prospects of a better real scenario at a longer term. 
Regarding domestic activity, one Board member mentioned that recent gures rati edanimprovedrelativeperformanceofnaturalresourcesGDP,particularly for mining, since other GDP was growing slowly driven by sectors more related to consumption and, more recently, by somewhat more favorable signs from manufacturing. He also stressed that the construction sector continued to fall and delaying its recovery in the margin. The demand side, he added, mirrored the same pattern. He said that although the synchronization across productive sectors was still pending, the growth of the wage bill, the evolution of credit, the growth of money, the increase in imports of capital and consumer goods, the slow but visible improvement of expectations —especially for the medium term— and the dynamics of the stock market, among several factors, were signals 
that domestic activity was becoming aligned with its expected trajectory. This, he continued, was reinforced by external conditions, where the risk had to do rather with the effects of a monetary stimulus reduction process, its interaction among geographical areas and the ability of the respective monetary authorities to guide the expectations of the market agents. 
One Board member emphasized that incoming data con rmed the somewhat stronger growth in developed economies, especially in Europe, without major changes in in ation. He noted that the main novelties were the persistence of a higher than expected copper price and a signi cant increase in the oil price. In the case of copper, this coincided with the presence of high speculative positions in that market, suggesting that a substantial part of the increase of recent months was explained by nancial movements. In terms of the relevant external scenario for Chile, this lent additional support to the positive impulse that emerging economies would be receiving in 2018. However, he continued, the validity of the risks associated with a normalization of interest rates in the developed world was reaf rmed, that would be faster than assumed by the markets. In his opinion, in this period one should add to the traditional channel of nancial ows, the vulnerability of commodity prices, especially copper. 
One Board member noted that news from abroad had continued to consolidate the vision of a recovery of the main developed economies. Thus, the growth gures, together with external nancing conditions and commodity prices continued to re ect a still positive external outlook. He noted that in addition to the risk of an abrupt market reaction to movements from the Federal Reserve or to higher in ation data, attention should also be paid to the risk of a further slowdown in China resulting from an adjustment in nancial conditions. 
About the monetary policy decision, one Board member said that holding the MPR at 2.5% seemed consistent with a scenario where the level of in ation would remain stable in the short term, but would converge to the target within the policy horizon, as long as the scenario of gradual recovery of the economy would continue to prevail, supported by a favorable external environment that was increasingly settled. He added that although the downside risks to in ation were lower, they still outweighed the upside risks, so it was necessary to keep a watchful eye in case any policy action was required, always keeping in mind that the goal was to ensure the convergence of in ation to the target within two years. He concluded by stating that the alternative of cutting 25bp off the MPR was the response to a higher-risk scenario, which, while valid this option, he had not seen as the predominant option last meeting, and much less so this time around. 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member said he saw no clear differences from last month’s scenario, which was particularly evident in the short-term forecasts. It was still true that, compared with June, when an MPR of 2.5% was considered appropriate, in ation projections for the turn of 2018 were considerably lower and the convergence of in ation to the target would take longer. Thus, it seemed relevant to wonder what MPR trajectory would have resulted in June from feeding the scenario of that moment with the facts and projections of today. In his opinion, it would clearly be a lower MPR than the current one, and 2.5% at that point would not have been considered the appropriate policy rate. In any case, he added, from a communication point of view, changes had been made since June. The rst one had been the inclusion of a downward risk balance for short-term in ation in the September Report, which had not been correctly internalized by the market. The second was a downward bias in the October’s statement, which the market had internalized. Regarding the latter, he added it was worth asking what role had this bias played in the rebound of in ation expectations, given that the expectations channel was one that monetary policy used to ensure the convergence of in ation to the target. For this reason, he believed that not reacting with monetary policy, after signaling a downward risk balance and an explicit downward bias, gave a very clear sign of preference for the status quo, which, in his opinion, could complicate the future conduct of monetary policy in case of facing a change of similar magnitude, but in the opposite direction, in expected in ation. 
One Board member noted that, in very general terms, the analysis reaf rmed the validity of the scenario outlined in the last Monetary Policy Report, notwithstanding some deviations in in ation originating in a somewhat more appreciated than expected peso and in fruits and vegetables’ prices showing unusual seasonal behavior. Activity and employment brought no big news, while it stood out that the ongoing adjustment in the real estate sector was taking longer and going deeper than projected. On investment, this had cancelled out the effect of a somewhat faster recovery in machinery and equipment. One element worth noting was that although nominal wages had slowed down somewhat, they did so in a smaller proportion than the effect of lower past in ation indexation would explain, which also pointed to a lower risk that in ation would further deviate from the target. In this context, he concluded, it seemed logical on this occasion to reaf rm the validity of the overall scenario by keeping the MPR at 2.5%, but also warning that the risks on in ation already mentioned last month were still present. 
One Board member pointed out that, compared with the September Report, which considered the proper benchmark for the analysis, the external scenario had improved, domestic gures and growth prospects were in line with 
projections, and the tension remained between stronger consumption and weaker investment. Furthermore, it was still dif cult to be clear about how would the copper price hike affect mining investment. At the same time, in ation remained low and was expected to remain close to 2% until well into 2018, which was a differentiating factor from the September Report. Aside from the important downward effect of food prices, the main determinant of this in ation correction for early 2018 was the working assumption of a more appreciated peso. He thought that the impact on monetary policy of this exchange rate appreciation should be properly weighed, as the estimates suggested that the signi cant degree of monetary expansion was essentially right and it should be maintained as long as the economy did not show signs of an overall recovery. In this context, the discussion was relevant again on whether the medium- term risks for in ation advised taking downward action, even if it had to be reversed shortly. Anyway, he added, the uncertainty about the future of the economy and considering the evolution of MPR expectations, as well as risks for in ation which, while still present, had diminished, inclined him to favor the option not to change the policy rate. This, he concluded, while not ceasing to communicate that the Bank would remain watchful for any deviations from the baseline scenario that could compromise in ation’s convergence to 3% within two years, especially in a context of low in ation rates. 
One Board member said that news accumulated in the last month pointed to improved external conditions, output indicators that rati ed the prospect of a gradual, though uneven, recovery of economic activity, and in ation offsetting part of the previous in ationary surprise, but did not necessarily bias down the risk balance of short-term in ation. In this context, the options proposed by the Research Division were still fully valid. Keeping the MPR was consistent with a baseline scenario where the economy continued its gradual recovery sustained by better external conditions, combined with accelerating consumption and recovering investment, even though starting from a somewhat lower base due to the foreseen negative third-quarter gure for gross xed capital formation in construction and other works, but boosted by improved expectations of consumers and rms. In this scenario, despite in ation —headline and core—remaining below 2% over most of 2018— because of a somewhat more appreciated peso and persistent more volatile price shocks— it would recover in 2019, once the end of these effects yielded the way to the impact of a gradual closing of activity gaps. He stressed that this was a scenario that relied signi cantly on an increase in economic dynamism compared to the last few months and what was expected until early 2018. Meanwhile, lowering the MPR to intensify the expansionary impulse of monetary policy would entail recognizing that, despite the higher in ation gure of October, the downward in ation risk identi ed in September was coming true. This option would also be 
5 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
supported by the fact that the period of low in ation could last longer as a result of greater persistence of price shocks, of downward adjustments in expectations and/or of a slower closing of the activity gap, preventing convergence to the target in two years’ time. The interaction of these phenomena posed a particularly signi cant threat that should be duly addressed. 
In his view, the baseline scenario that was being delineated made the option of lowering the MPR at this meeting representing, rather than an insurance, a signal to guide the market in a period of particular uncertainty about the evolution of prices and the gap, as could be the second quarter of 2018. All in all, he believed that the only factor mitigating the option of reducing the MPR was that some of the biggest fears expressed in the last meeting —such as a rise in real market rates and a reduction in two-year in ation expectations— had ended or reversed. This, he concluded, allowed buying time to better prepare the ground for a future decision and to socialize, through the Monetary Policy Report, a macroeconomic perspective for the coming months that had more nuances and conditions than some agents anticipated. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Claro and Board members Vial, García and Costa, to hold the monetary policy rate at 2.5%. 
