MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 227, held on 15 October 2015. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Rodrigo Valdés. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policies Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Elías Albagli, Modelling and Economic Analysis Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
Background information made available since the last Meeting were generally consistent with projections contained in the last Monetary Policy Report. September’s in ation had been somewhat below the forecast, but, when combined with the positive surprise of August, in ation had aligned with the projections in the Report. More importantly, the surprises in core in ation— CPIEFE—had been mild and, as with headline in ation, two months after the Report’s release, exhibited no signi cant deviations from the forecasts in it. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/en/faces/pmonetaria/reuniones 
Regarding activity, GDP of non-natural resources sectors had evolved as forecast. Not so mining production, which had performed poorly. This would adversely affect the performance of total GDP, whose annual growth could even fall below the growth range proposed in the last Report. Except for speci c elements, demand remained weak, in line with estimates; the labor market continued to accommodate to the cyclical adjustment with special resilience; and interest rates in the domestic nancial markets remained low. 
The global economy presented no major changes either with respect to September’s baseline scenario, although the probability of occurrence of some risks had increased. 
In this context, the vision that in ation’s convergence to the target would be slow and would require reducing the monetary stimulus by 50 or 75 bp over the next few months remained valid. 
About the rise to more than 3% of some measures of expected in ation two years ahead that had been discussed in the previous meeting, there had been a turnaround to the target value. At the same time, the yield curve had adjusted, aligning itself with an MPR trajectory that was comparable with the one used as a working assumption in the September Report. This was an indication that, on average, the market considered that the adjustment of the monetary stimulus contained in this trajectory was right and that the risks of an unwanted evolution of in ation expectations had diminished. 
In this context, the Research Division thought that the option of raising the MPR by 25 bp and keeping the upward bias was appropriate for this meeting, considering that within an in ation targeting scheme the path of the MPR should be such that it would bring projected in ation to the target over the policy horizon. Thus, beyond the vagaries of monthly in ation gures, and despite expectations being well anchored to the target, the Research Division was of the opinion that it was necessary to partially reduce the monetary stimulus as had been stated in the Report and continuous communications by the Bank. This, considering the higher persistence of in ation, the somewhat lower than foreseen in recent quarters output gap and the view that the economy was well suited to gradually raise the pace of growth, approaching its potential towards the end of 2016. 
Moreover, the monetary impulse was particularly strong, as reflected in negative short-term real interest rates—actually, among the lowest in a group of comparable countries—and near record lows at longer terms. This, notwithstanding the vision that monetary policy should still contribute to smoothing the cycle and remain expansionary for quite some time. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Anyway, the Research Division thought that the option of keeping the MPR at 3% was not to be ruled out entirely, since some of the risk scenarios outlined in the Report—which entailed adverse consequences on medium-term in ation and output, although not necessarily on short-term in ation—had seen their probability of occurrence increased. In particular, the downturn of the Brazilian economy had been faster than expected, precluding several economies of the region from adjusting their foreign accounts and, in some cases, their scal accounts. In this context, the likelihood of a nancial contagion of the problems in Brazil to the region and, ultimately, to Chile, had also increased. 
Meanwhile, the immobility of the policy rate in the United States, among other factors, had led the markets to take a softer position regarding future actions by the Federal Reserve, widening the discrepancy between the market’s view and the statements by several Fed leaders. Moreover, everything pointed at the other developed countries’ central banks were more inclined to increase the degree of monetary stimulus, which would intensify the divergence of their own monetary policies with the Fed’s. In that context, there would probably be more volatility in the nancial markets, higher risk premiums, a further strengthening of the dollar globally, and new downward corrections to commodity prices. In Chile, while showing some stability, con dence indicators were still low. In addition, for some time already, the components that normally anticipate the employment cycle showed that a faster adjustment of the labor market was a real possibility. 
Thus, pausing and waiting for new information was an option that should not be overlooked. However, in the opinion of the Research Division, the associated costs—in terms of the probable delay in in ation’s convergence to the target and the dif culties of communicating an unexpected and, to some extent, discordant with earlier statements, policy action—clearly outweighed the bene ts of such delay. This, especially when considering that some of the effects from these risk scenarios could be very short-lived and that, should they trigger more persistent or disruptive deviations in the economy, the Central Bank had the capacity to rapidly change the policy course, as history showed. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
The Board members agreed that background information made available since the release of the September Report were consistent with the scenario depicted in it. Regarding external developments, several Board members mentioned the deterioration of emerging economies, highlighting the case of Brazil, and expectations about the upcoming measures by the Fed. One Board member was worried that the increased vulnerability perceived in South American countries 
also reached the better managed economies, which meant that the effects of possible contagion from the interest rate increase in the US and new capital out ows from emerging economies had to be assessed. On the same note, he expressed his concern about the growing divergence between nancial markets’ expectations and the Fed’s vision regarding when it would begin withdrawing the monetary stimulus, because any premature action by the Federal Reserve might cause a stronger impact on the emerging market economies. 
One Board member said that most likely at the center of the explanation of the nancial markets’ dynamic was the Fed’s decision not to raise the policy rate at the last meeting and, in his view, a confusing communication on the reasons for such decision. The attening of the yield curve in the United States had prompted a search for yield that had driven up the prices of the riskier assets, including those from emerging countries, despite their weakened performance. This could be rapidly reversed before a different signal on the part of the Fed which in his opinion was, in the short term, one of the risks that called for special attention. 
On the domestic scene, several Board members commented that the downward surprise of September’s CPI in ation offset August’s surprise in the opposite direction, so that the in ationary scenario of September’s Monetary Policy Report continued to be totally valid. Some Board members drew attention to the slowdown in nominal wages, which, anyway, were still growing strongly. 
About activity, all the Board members referred to the slowdown in mining. Some of them noted that there were no new developments in the other sectors, which were thought to be more important in the evaluation of in ationary pressures. Several Board members stressed the ongoing dynamism of job creation. 
On the demand side, several Board members noted that the scal consolidation process announced by the Finance Minister was consistent with the medium- term setting considered in last Report’s projections. One Board member said that this would take some strength off domestic demand. 
Several Board members said that, most recently, different data revealed some concern among banks about their client portfolios’ risks, for both commercial and consumer loans. This was consistent with the cyclical evolution of the economy and also with the diagnosis included in the latest Financial Stability Reports about the reduced relative strength of credit users. In fact, the debt of Chilean companies remained at high levels and, despite some mitigating factors, it was clear that their capacity to confront a complex external scenario and a domestic one of low growth had diminished in recent years. On the Chilean household’s front, there was also a gradual increase in borrowing, which in some of the risk scenarios could undermine their repayment behavior towards banks. Accordingly, 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
it was crucial for monetary policy to stay exible, particularly that starting a process of monetary impulse adjustment would not represent an obstacle to a swift reaction if risk scenarios that required a change in the course of monetary policy materialized. One Board member added that the capacity of monetary policy to react was intimately related to the in ation situation and the vision of the market about the monetary authority’s commitment and attitude regarding such phenomenon, particularly in circumstances where in ation remained high, the capacity or exibility to react could be signi cantly debilitated. 
Turning to the policy decision, all the Board members agreed that the two options presented by the Research Division were valid, since the scenario described in the Report had not changed with the information gathered after its publication. 
One Board member recalled that the conduct of monetary policy under in ation targeting implies that the interest rate trajectory must be consistent with in ation converging to the center of the target range towards the end of the two-year horizon. Translating this into an interest rate path made decision making more predictable and systematic, allowing to properly orient private expectations, and properly justify its forward-looking nature, not reacting mechanically to events, for example, of monetary policy elsewhere in the world. He added that, if the MPR was held constant at this meeting, a very clear bias should be adopted in communicating that an increase was near. In his opinion, this would entail including in the Press Release an even more explicit bias than last month’s, which would be very dif cult to do, precisely because monetary policy under in ation targeting had to be persistent and systematic. Furthermore, the option to raise the rate implied some probability of further increases in the coming months, but exactly when was certainly not so clear. 
One Board member noted that after a lengthy period in which both headline and core in ation had surpassed the tolerance range—a situation that would also persist for several quarters before normalizing—it was time to begin to partially withdraw the monetary stimulus. Further postponing this decision augmented the probability of having to make sharper adjustments in the future. 
According to another Board member, the data analyzed led to two conclusions. First, that the need to gradually reduce the expansionary nature of monetary policy had not changed, because part of the phenomenon that could originally have been seen as temporary had shown signs of having a persistent component, re ected mainly in the behavior of the labor market and services in ation. Second, that the required change in the MPR was limited. The economy still showed no signs of a recovery; the labor market seemed to be weakening; and medium-term in ation expectations remained stable, so the accommodative monetary policy should be maintained.However, in ation’s level, composition, persistence and upside risks 
in the short term reinforced the need for a bounded adjustment that would ensure the convergence of in ation to 3% in 2017. Only then would monetary policy be able to continue to help in the economic recovery and avoid rises in long-term rates. Thus, in the current circumstances, an MPR adjustment of about 50 bp in the coming months was envisioned. He added that a third option could be added, for the purposes of clearly communicating and gaining exibility going forward: raising the rate by 50 bp at this meeting, and removing the bias. However, in his opinion, it could give a confusing signal to the market, as it was not expecting it. 
One Board member reiterated that monetary policy had been very expansionary in recent times and it would remain so, but it was necessary to reduce some of its momentum in order to succeed in bringing in ation to the target over the projection horizon. Actually, the MPR was now the most expansionary in Latin America and probably in all the emerging world. This had contributed to a soft landing of the economy, which had been especially benign compared with previous slowdowns. Although he thought both options were valid, it seemed to him that raising the MPR to 3.25% clearly dominated. Making this decision was consistent with the message that had been disclosed. Not doing it was an incongruity that would affect asset prices and expected in ation. In his view, keeping the current impulse for much longer was inconsistent with the in ation target and the market perceived it like that. The sooner action was taken, in line with the Board’s analysis, the more consistent policy would be. He stressed that, based on the new estimates of potential GDP, the gap was negative but moderate, so it would hardly be seen as a source of a strong anti-in ationary impulse. In addition, it had to be noted that the persistence shown by in ation pointed to a gradual convergence to the target. The option of keeping the rate at 3% was becoming inconsistent because there was nothing to back the view that the scenario outlined in the Monetary Policy Report had changed. Still, one argument for this option could be the slower wage growth of recent months. However, caution was in order, as they continued to grow above the historical average and one could not rule out that the labor market’s indexing and resilience could maintain relative dynamism of this variable for longer. He concluded by noting that the option of raising the interest rate showed the straightforward decision of the Central Bank not to allow in ation surprises in the medium term, thus reducing the risks from having in ation above the target for a year and a half. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Claro, and Board members Vial and García, to raise the monetary policy interest rate by 25 basis points to 3.25%. 
