MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary Policy Meeting No. 251, held on 19 October 2017. 
Present: Mario Marcel, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member; Rosanna Costa, Board member. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Solange Berstein, Financial Operations Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Markets Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Financial Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Kevin Cowan, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Carlos Medel, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background minutes and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
Local output and demand data, as well as gures coming from abroad, were consistent with the scenarios described in the September Report and the meeting of last month. In particular, the domestic outlook continued to show weak activity, but where a number of external and internal factors allowed to project a steady recovery over the following quarters. With this, the activity gap should stabilize around its current levels and begin to close in the second half of 2018. 
On the external front, the increase in the copper price stood out, which, as would be detailed in November’s Business Perception Report, coincided with 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
some improved dynamism in the northernmost zone of the country. It also stood out that activity data continued to suggest a synchronized economic recovery of the world’s leading economies. At home, the improved private growth expectations—which were converging towards the projections of the last Monetary Policy Report—and better con dence indicators, albeit driven more by future expectations than by a rebound of current conditions were worth noting. However, it had to be kept in mind that, both inside and outside the country, there were still signi cant risks associated with nancial, political and protectionist issues. 
In ation remained below 2% annually and was expected to stay below or around the lower bound of the tolerance range for several more quarters. Behind this was the fact that in ation of non-tradables, in line with the evolution of the activity gaps, had been steadily decreasing, tradables in ation had gone through a cycle of much sharper ups and downs due to the direct action of the exchange rate; and a string of speci c factors that had mainly affected items not included in core in ation. 
This latter factor had intensi ed with the latest in ation gure, which had been signi cantly below market projections and our own. The surprise had largely to do with the behavior of fruits and vegetables and a few other products. With this, in ation was well below the forecast of the September Monetary Policy Report and even more so compared with June. Core in ation, however, showed minor deviations from what had been projected then. 
Regarding the impact of these surprises of core in ation on its medium-term dynamics, a preliminary exercise that factored in the most important changes in the short-term scenario—the surprise of in ation, the low exchange rate compared with the statistical closing of the Report, and the improved price of copper—suggested that the convergence of in ation might be delayed by a quarter more than was thought in September, and that headline in ation would stay low for a few more quarters than anticipated. 
That it did not affect substantially the projected convergence of in ation in the target horizon was to be expected, because due to the nature of the surprise— concentrated in a few goods, mostly non-core—, neither a demand-side problem nor a greater-than-expected excess capacity could be inferred from it. 
However, it had to be kept in mind that, despite being a one-off shock, it occurred in a context where there had been a string of downward surprises, which had pulled in ation down well below the June forecast. This was important, because 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
although it was logical not to react to speci c price shocks due to their low impact on the future trajectory of in ation, their accumulated effect could have bigger effects—for example, via indexation or through its impact on the formation of expectations—and, therefore, could require some accommodation of the monetary policy trajectory. Indexation and the effects on the formation of expectations could be intensi ed if monetary policy failed to react, since the lower expected in ation could affect real rates, marginally depressing demand. 
The data of recent months suggested that some of these mechanisms had been operating, probably due to the appreciation of the peso, and that they had been exacerbated after the latest in ation surprise. In effect, in ation expectations at different terms had been adjusted downwards and real rates had risen. However, it should be noted that it was particularly dif cult to interpret the movements of market prices so shortly after the CPI in ation had been known. This, because portfolio readjustments led them to react with greater force, so part of the phenomenon could be expected to dissipate. 
All in all, in a context where the general outlook had not changed substantially from September, but where the risks on the convergence of in ation had increased, the Research Division was of the opinion that the policy options proposed last month were still valid. Namely, to keep the policy rate where it was or to lower it by 25 basis points (bp), bringing it to 2.25%. For the same arguments put forward in previous occasions, a neutral bias was suggested for the rst option and a downward bias for the second. 
Regarding the option to keep the rate unchanged, it should be noted that holding it until activity indicators gave more clear signs that the process of gaps closing had been af rmed—the baseline assumption in the Report—was consistent with the need to maintain an expansionary monetary policy stance and with a vision that the shocks that had diverted in ation from the projected path would have no big impact on its medium-term convergence, thanks to its one-off nature. Moreover, along with the higher price of copper and the improved expectations and con dence indicators, the recovery seemed to have been af rmed in the margin. It was also important to recall that there was no promised deadline to start normalizing the policy rate, but rather a signal that this would happen when the economy showed a more solid rebound. Lastly, this option was also based on the fact that part of the most recent movements in real rates re ected a rearrangement of portfolios and, therefore, should tend to be undone over time. Against this option was that the increase in real rates ampli ed the risk of a slower pace of economic recovery, a phenomenon that, at the end of the day, was still perceived as weak and was the anchor of the convergence of in ation. 
Like in the past months, the option to boost the monetary stimulus rested mainly on a risk management argument for the convergence of in ation, which, according to the Research Division, had increased after the last in ation gure. This could be so for various reasons. First, in a context of great risk appetite in the global nancial markets, it was possible that the dollar movement did not come with a faster closing of the gaps, at least in the short term. Thus, although in the long run it was reasonable to expect some coherence between the real value of the peso and the state of the local and external cycles, at shorter terms there could be situations where in ation pressures were reduced, pushing real rates up, which in a context of still weak activity, low in ation and somewhat lower medium-term in ation expectations, could negatively affect the convergence of in ation. The surprise in September in ation added an element of extra risk, contributing to a more pronounced deviation of in ation than expected. 
Against this option, it had to be recognized that it was dif cult to communicate an MPR change precisely after such a big surprise without appearing to be reacting to a speci c gure—the Board had been emphatic in pointing out that this should not be done. On the other hand, as had been mentioned previously, changes intended to minimize risks for the convergence of in ation should be undone once the materialization of those risks became unlikely, which could imply movements of the MPR in opposite directions in a relatively short term, also involving communication complications. It should be mentioned that, unlike other occasions in which the Bank had been at similar crossroads, this time the distance between the MPR and the value on which, according to the baseline scenario, it should stand in two years’ time, was only 100 bp. 
2. Monetary Policy Decision3/ 
All the Board members agreed that the most important development of the month had been the low and surprising September in ation. They also agreed that it was necessary to calmly review its nature and consequences on the future trajectory of in ation. One Board member mentioned that the surprise was clearly dominated by one-off shocks, both in the CPIEFE and in the CPI’s more volatile components. Therefore, he estimated that, although this shock affected the price trajectory in the short term, since its reversal might not be instantaneous, it was not possible to directly deduce that it compromised the 
3/ In order to preserve the regulatory individual anonymity in the discussion, all ve Board members are herein referred to as males, including female member Ms. Rosanna Costa. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
target in the two-year horizon. Neither was it possible to associate it with demand factors because, if anything, a tone of greater optimism could be seen regarding activity. However, he thought that there was an even bigger risk that had to be monitored, that was becoming even more complex, because other global and internal phenomena were also in uencing the evolution of prices. On the one hand, expectations of a more accelerated recovery and a price of copper that could be perceived as more favorable in a sustained manner, led to appreciative pressures on the exchange rate with respect to which there would be no obvious reaction. On the contrary, in an external scenario with a more accelerated normalization by the Federal Reserve, it could work in the opposite direction. In his opinion, the Board was facing scenarios with risks in different directions, and different probability of occurrence, which should be adequately reviewed inasmuch as their effects could compromise the in ation target. 
One Board member noted that although the analysis indicated that the recent in ation surprise was mainly explained by decreases in a handful of highly volatile assets, this was an element to be taken into account as it came in the footsteps of several surprises in the same direction. Also because it could trigger more persistent effects that delayed convergence to the target beyond wisdom. However, he concluded that, in all the scenarios considered, in ation returned to the tolerance range at the end of the rst quarter of 2018. He added that after that, the differences in the trajectory of in ation were minimal and within the margin of error. Finally, he believed that lower in ation also had short-term expansionary effects that had not been fully considered, due to the higher purchasing power of salaries or the lower nancial burden of UF-indexed debts. 
One Board member noted that the prospect of a gradual recovery had been accompanied by a fast slowdown in in ation, which, incidentally, had been marked by the very low September gure. In-depth background analysis in the Report yielded that the fall in in ation of recent months re ected three phenomena. First, a rather anomalous behavior of some prices, particularly foodstuffs, whose disin ation had been signi cant. Second, the effect of a sustained appreciation of the peso in recent quarters; and, third, that economic activity, which had behaved poorly, had generated a steady and slow deceleration of mainly services-related in ation. This last consideration was the main justi cation for maintaining a very expansionary monetary policy stance in recent times. 
One Board member said that although the low in ation of September owed largely to one-time movements in prices, some of them not in the core in ation basket, it should not be underestimated, considering its magnitude and links with other price movements. Actually, he noted, the September price shock 
had coupled with other downside impacts of previous months. Similarly, he continued, the renewed appreciation of the peso since mid-August would be transmitted into lower prices in the coming months. In his opinion, these factors, ampli ed by the characteristic indexation of the Chilean economy, would prolong the current phase of low in ation rates—headline and EFE— signi cantly beyond projections, except, of course, if there were new surprises in the opposite direction. In particular, for the CPIEFE lower than the present annual variation rates were foreseen at least until the second quarter of 2018. 
One Board member pointed out that the analysis of in ation surprises had to be taken with caution. In his opinion, the argument that since they were due to speci c elements, one should not react using the MPR, was not correct. It was true that if the shocks that had affected in ation had been widespread, the policy response would have needed to go beyond the options stated, cutting the MPR at by an amount at least similar to the reduction of expected in ation one year ahead since the last two Reports. But that was not the case, so the right reaction had to be calibrated, since the analysis showed that there were signs that, even though due to speci c elements, the convergence of in ation to the target could be compromised in relevant magnitudes. As the options of the Research Division had noted, this responded to the summing up of news that, taken together, had materially and for a prolonged period of time reduced in ation perspectives for the usual policy horizon. 
About activity and demand, one Board member stressed that consumption was marginally above expectations and, going forward, its fundamentals would continue to sustain it. The expectations of rms and consumers had improved signi cantly, albeit from very low levels, and asset prices continued to point to a recovery. However, it was still true that it was a fragile, evolving process, with persistent lags in the construction cycle. He concluded pointing out that the movements in shorter term interest rates could be due to downward in ation surprises, while for longer term, the could respond to better perspectives for the economy. This was consistent with market expectations that in the last months had been coming closer to the projections of the Bank. 
One Board member noted that data on activity, demand and employment were in line with projections, with marginal differences in their composition. On the other hand, the improved con dence indicators, the higher copper price, the evolution of the real wage bill and foreign trade, suggested that the risks of downward deviations the expected scenario of activity might have decreased. He added that the antecedents examined showed a somewhat better international scenario, especially due to the higher copper price. Still, although it had exceeded expectations, important doubts remained regarding its permanence over time. 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
The available evidence suggested that the recent increases were based more on greater nancial positions than on the fundamentals of physical supply and demand. If this was the case, even marginal changes in global nancial conditions could revert an important part of these copper price increases. All the other external variables remained in line with the forecasts, con guring a positive external outlook, which was beginning to be re ected in Chilean exports, as well as in other South American countries’. 
One Board member mentioned that the growth gures were gradually improving. Monthly activity had been somewhat above expectations, but due mainly to stronger mining production. Expectations indicators showed some increase and the market vision for growth in 2018 and 2019 had shown a substantial rise. At the same time, several important components of demand—mainly investment—were still weak and, accordingly, construction indicators were still poor. All in all, he believed that the risks of a more persistent fragility and a further deterioration of the labor market had subsided. 
One Board member noted that August’s economic activity had been perfectly compatible with the trajectory foreseen in the last Report. Thus, if these orders of magnitude remained, the economy would post some growth in the third and fourth quarters well above the rst half of the year and outperforming the growth pace of the last three years. He added that the momentum of a more dynamic external scenario and higher copper prices was no longer just an expectation but had begun showing up in the actual foreign trade gures of the last three months. The contribution of monetary policy was re ected in favorable domestic nancial conditions that had contributed to a—still bounded—recovery of the dynamism of credit in some market segments. Nonetheless, he resumed, the behavior of the economy continued to re ect very different velocities among the components of demand. The expansion of consumption and the reactivation of exports contrasted with weak gross xed capital formation, which showed negative annual variation rates, mostly concentrated in construction and other works. All this kept elements of uncertainty about the magnitude and persistence of the recovery, especially once the annual variations ceased to be favored by low comparison bases. 
One Board member mentioned that there was a possibility that the international scenario, in particular, would support a faster recovery of activity. However, the Bank had manifested the need to be cautious, noting that the macro scenario depicted a modest, gradual recovery and quite long-lasting gaps that had been well internalized by the market, which had tended to align with that vision. In his opinion, it was important to remember that in the discussion leading to the Monetary Policy Report, the risk had come up that communication of the 
working assumption for the MPR could affect the interest rate structure. After the September meeting and the in ationary surprise of that month, the curve in UFs had risen signi cantly. 
About the monetary policy decision, one Board member said that, with the information at hand, it was possible to recognize the important magnitude of the in ation surprise, making it necessary to analyze and monitor the risk of a scenario in which its persistence, its effect on expectations, and even long rates, compromised the two-year target. However, for now, it did not look like that was the baseline scenario. The cost of waiting for more data seemed small, in contrast to the opposite risk. An action based on risks, or preventive measures that could be quickly reversed, would add volatility to the Bank’s message, which could be more costly at a time that called for accurate messages and actions. In addition, the option of lowering the MPR with a downward bias put more pressure on the statement, because it could risk exaggerating the risk conveyed and confuse the process of expectations formation. 
One Board member said that he believed that the Board had been careful in the Report when calibrating the working assumption for the MPR, considering downside risks to in ation, particularly the exchange rate issue. However, he also believed that the market had not perceived it that way, because it emphasized rather a certain strategy of keeping the MPR at unconditionally, underestimating the importance that the Board gave to the downward risk scenario for in ation. The tepid reaction of the nominal rates to the CPI surprise despite its signi cant magnitude, was proof of this. For that reason, he thought that it did not matter much if the market anticipated an MPR cut at this meeting. He added that it could be argued that lowering the rate at this meeting could be costly, because it increased the risk of having to undo it in no time. In his opinion, faced with an important disin ationary risk, this cost could be even greater if the decision was delayed. But more profoundly, from the standpoint of a systematic monetary policy, failure to act promptly because it was perceived that the reversal could be costly, precisely made the reversion more costly. In his opinion, it was also necessary to consider the symmetry of the scenarios. If instead of the current scenario, one were facing an MPR above the neutral level, growth above potential and in ation above the target, all in similar magnitude to the current deviations, but in the opposite direction, there would be little doubt that the appropriate decision would be to raise the policy rate. Finally, he also thought it important to point out that if the evolution of the baseline scenario since June was taken into account, with the short- and medium-term in ation projections and with the consequent monetary policy strategy of the time, clearly today’s in ation was below that assumed in the baseline scenario. Therefore, and consistently with the decision-making process of the Board, the current in ationary situation, 
5 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
from the June Monetary Policy Report’s perspective, when the MPR was at the same level, would possibly have triggered different policy responses than the ones adopted since then. He concluded by noting that the only argument he considered appropriate for keeping the MPR unchanged was to accumulate more information to be able to evaluate if the downward movement should be greater than 25 bp. 
One Board member said that there was no evidence warranting a change in the general orientation of monetary policy or an adjustment to the MPR. Notwithstanding this, he believed that it was important to assess whether there was persistence in the downward surprises in in ation, as well as possible second-round effects, which should come mainly from the labor market. For this reason, he voted for keeping the MPR at 2.5%, but indicating that there was the need to assess whether recent in ation surprises resulted in signi cant deviations from convergence to the target, which would justify a marginal adjustment to the rate in the future. He added that the difference between a cut of 25 bp now and the option of accompanying it by another consecutive 25 bp cut was negligible if the market expected a quick reversal of such adjustments. This was nothing new, because the simulations showed that changes that were perceived as not very persistent had very little effect. Therefore, he concluded, he hardly understood the need to include a downward bias as a complement to the decision to lower the policy rate now. 
One Board member said that data accumulated in the last month fueled the Report’s vision in two main dimensions. On the one hand, a somewhat more constructive growth outlook was observed going forward, especially from market expectations. Among other things, this could explain part of the rate hike of recent weeks in the longer part of the yield curve. On the other hand, the in ation surprise of September had been quite signi cant, and re ected the materialization of a risk identi ed in the Report for short-term in ation. The evaluation indicated that low in ation was not a re ection of slower economic activity or a weaker labor market, but rather seemed to be linked to exchange rate effects and speci c shocks that were very intense and not very persistent, such as foods. These characteristics had caused both the markets’ and our own estimates to assess this phenomenon as eminently transitory. Therefore, both forecast and expected short-term in ation had been signi cantly corrected downwards, and for the medium-term had undergone minor modi cations. In his opinion, by themselves, these elements did not seem to justify the need to provide a different monetary stimulus from the one proposed in the Report. However, it was possible that low in ation around 2% for several quarters, which was the scenario perceived as plausible going forward, even if a consequence of supply-side shocks, could delay the convergence of in ation to the target, 
whether due to the effects of indexation, a tightening of nancial conditions or problematic formation of expectations. If these effects turned out to be long lasting, an MPR cut could be required to maintain the desired monetary impulse. In any case, although he believed that the information available did not justify moving the MPR persistently enough, the risk deserved attention. 
One Board member said that he saw three relevant questions to decide the orientation of monetary policy. First, if the persistence of price shocks would suf ce to jeopardize the convergence to the target; second, if the effect of a prolonged period of low in ation threatened the strength of the recovery and, therefore, the closing of the gap, because of its effects on real interest rates; and, third, what was the foreseeable market’s response to an MPR adjustment in a context where the market had adjusted its vision on the strength of the economy. Of the three questions, the one with the most direct response was the risk of an increase in real rates that could weaken the monetary impulse and the speed of the recovery of activity and in ation. This, not because a mechanical calculation of real rates should always lead to a monetary policy reaction —which would be absurd given the many factors that act on in ation over time—, but because of the prolonged period of expected low in ation, the combination with an increase in real market rates that factored in expectations of lower in ation, and by the still fragile recovery of output. About the effect on the two-year-ahead in ation projection, the preliminary estimates pointed to a moderate, yet not negligible, differential. These projections, however, should still bene t from a more complete modeling, inputting additional information becoming available in the weeks ahead. In his view, the most complex issue to adjust the MPR at this meeting was market perceptions. Changes in growth expectations, despite the consistent message of the Bank, had led to rule out MPR adjustments and had possibly put pressure on the exchange rate, in which case the message of this meeting had to be well calibrated, in terms of both action and communication. This included the contradiction that would emerge from the Board’s usual message of not reacting to one-off in ation data, and change to an immediate response to a CPI gure, however low it might have been. For this reason, he believed that it was more ef cient to groom the market for a later adjustment than to act at this meeting in an unexpected manner. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Claro and Board members Vial, García and Costa, to keep the monetary policy rate at 2.5%. 
