MINUTES OF THE 
MONETARY POLICY MEETING The monetary policy session N°191 was held on 18 October 2012. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board member; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Felipe Larraín. 
Also present: Miguel Ángel Nacrur, Deputy General Manager and General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Matías Bernier, Financial Operations Division Deputy Director; Kevin Cowan, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Claudio Raddatz, Economic Research Manager; Luis Opazo, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Consultant Manager of Communications; Enrique Orellana, Monetary Policy Strategy and Communication Manager; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
1.1 Brie ng 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, can be accessed on the Bank’s website1/. 
1.2 Background analysis and comments 
Commenting on international matters, the improved conditions in Europe after the announcements made by authorities were discussed, con rming that no new developments had taken place that could have increased nancial tensions 
1/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
signi cantly. In any case, it was stated that the region still has a long way to go before resolving its fundamental issues, so probabilities remained that the stress could intensify further. Meanwhile, if European conditions were not to worsen any further, the risks for emerging economies would still be high, due to implications in terms of capital ows, parities and current account. 
Regarding the domestic scenario, there was discussion about the evolution of real wages and their effect on consumer behavior. The possibility was mentioned that the shortage of labor that is being observed could last longer. Also commented was the foreseen volatility of output in the next months, in view of the four more holidays of September compared with last year, and the three more working days of October 2012 over 2011. 
2. Options 
On this occasion, with the information gathered since the last meeting, the Research Division proposed as the relevant option to keep the monetary policy interest rate (MPR) at 5.0%. 
Developments abroad did not amount to con gure any signi cant change in the external scenario with respect to issues reviewed at the last monetary policy meeting and forecasts in September’s Monetary Policy Report. The world growth outlook was similar to that of a month before. The world economy was expected to continue growing moderately to begin a slow recovery next year. The risks of the external scenario were still present and international con dence remained weak. 
While recognizing the advances made in the Eurozone, political and institutional agreements to provide sustainable solutions to the region’s sovereign debt problems still called for a long process of bargaining and implementation. In the United States, there was some visible improvement in economic numbers, but the risk of a severe scal adjustment being necessary in early 2013 remained latent. The slowdown in China’s economic growth, a cause for concern in the later weeks, was showing some marginal signs of attenuation, and its effects on commodity markets had been limited. 
Domestically, incoming gures for output and in ation re ected no major change either with respect to the last Monetary Policy Report. Prospects for the coming months continued to assume a slowdown of output and demand due to the lagged effects of the greater external uncertainty and the slower growth of our trading partners. However, some preliminary gures suggested 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
that nal demand could strengthen somewhat, thanks to both push pressures from durable goods purchases and machinery & equipment investments. This pattern would result in a widening of the current account de cit as measured in trend prices, although the actual de cit could be smaller than the one assumed in the last Monetary Policy Report, re ecting the recent behavior of the copper price. Meanwhile, in ation was expected to be in the lower part of the tolerance range, because of adjustments to some speci c prices, the impact of the recent currency appreciation and a smaller incidence of fuel prices. 
Accordingly, leaving the MPR unchanged was totally consistent with the need for a monetary stimulus to align the evolution of output with its potential, as indicated in the last Monetary Policy Report. 
The option of lowering the monetary policy rate could be justi ed, as had been on previous occasions, as a preventative measure to boost demand, considering the risk of a sharper deceleration of economic growth and in ation. This could happen if some of the external risk scenarios depicted in the last Monetary Policy Report would materialize. However, the likelihood of these worst-case scenarios had not increased in the last month. Moreover, recent news showed that domestic demand and related indicators were still strong, while local nancial conditions remained benign, which did not anticipate, per se, a more drastic freezing of domestic demand in the coming months. 
Thus, the option of a policy rate cut was deemed not the best choice, the same as last month. 
The option of raising the policy rate was also ruled out this time. Such a decision could be justi ed as a response to the recent dynamic of domestic expenditure, which had kept high growth rates despite the worsened external scenario. Such strong demand could tighten domestic market conditions and generate conditions favoring in ationary pressures, which would call for a more decisive monetary policy action. Nonetheless, the latest developments suggested that some output slowdown had occurred, owing to both weak external demand and a milder inventory accumulation while its growth rate had become aligned with the trend, as had employment growth. At the same time, in ation and private in ation expectations indicators were near the values consistent with this variable achieving the target. 
Finally, the option of keeping the policy rate constant was justi ed in its current level being within the range of neutral values, which bought time and provided exibility to wait for and accumulate more information about the external scenario’s evolution and its impact on the Chilean economy. This 
option was also what the market expected the most, so it should have no major effect on the interest rate curve. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
All the Board members noted the greater calm of international nancial markets, and agreed that news coming from the Eurozone were good. This, because they suggested that a roadmap was being drawn to resolve the region’s problems, plus the fact that some events that could have had dramatic consequences had been circumvented. Still, they noted that the efforts to create a banking and scal union would be slow, so the recent developments contributed to reducing short-term risks, but the situation was still complex. The unfolding of the situation in Spain and its possible request for a rescue package would be critical. 
Several Board members noted that the growth slowdown of some emerging economies seemed to have come to a stop, where most noteworthy was the case of China. 
One Board member said that, in his view, what was most likely was that the United States would apply a drastic scal adjustment, without political support that could smooth it. Thus, although it was not a potential cause of a crisis, the U.S. was exposed to signi cant cyclical uctuations into the future. The same Board member stated further that the monetary policy being adopted by the U.S. economy was tantamount to favoring a depreciation of the U.S. dollar, since such lax monetary policies generate adjustment effects on the currencies, relative prices, and, therefore, quantities in the rest of the world. What the consequences on the various currencies would ultimately be was something to monitor going forward. 
With respect to the evolution of the Chilean economy, all the Board members underscored the strength of domestic demand, and particularly of consumption. In this sense, several Board members drew attention to the evolution of wages and said that it still needed careful observation. According to one Board member, it had been somewhat above what could be the sum of trend productivity and the Central Bank’s target in ation for several consecutive months already. Some Board members commented on the deceleration of credit growth, which appeared to be both timely and prudent. 
One Board member pointed out that the variables that could predict the future path of demand was giving mixed signals. On the one hand were credit 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
aggregates showing a moderation and slow growth in total employment. On the other hand were a dynamic wage mass, optimistic expectations in households and enterprises, and banks that reported an upward sloping demand for credit. 
Some Board members stated that, if domestic demand accelerates any further, the current account de cit at trend prices could exceed expectations, although in the nal balance it could be offset by the higher copper price. One Board member said that in such an open scenario, it is convenient to dispose of some way of moderating aggregate expenditure in what remains of this year and throughout 2013. 
All the Board members noted that in ation is now within the tolerance range, albeit in the lower part of it. Medium-term risks are still present, but in the short term in ation is likely to stay at the bottom of the tolerance range. One Board member highlighted the variability of in ation rates over the past few months. One Board member pointed out that he saw no inconsistency between the different components of in ation and the various dimensions of the business cycle, although he did observe pressures from domestic prices being counteracted by lower import costs. 
Regarding the monetary policy decision, all the Board members opined that the most appropriate option this time was to hold the MPR unchanged. 
One Board member said that with the information at hand, the option of not changing the MPR clearly dominated. Because the MPR was in a position that could be considered neutral and the identi ed risks—both inside and outside the country—cancelled one another out in terms of their possible implications for monetary policy, the range of reasonable options had shrunk signi cantly for the short term. 
One Board member said that, in his view, there were still two scenarios, neither of them easy. On the one hand, a disorderly adjustment of imbalances in the Eurozone would generate and pose evident challenges that have been analyzed before. On the other hand, a smoother landing, with slow growth in developed economies, would mean an equilibrium where those countries’ interest rates would be very low for a very long time. This scenario also poses challenges to economies such as Chile, which is rather at its production frontier, and could trigger excessive capital in ows, nancial speculation and an exchange rate appreciation. 
One Board member said that the tension between a weak global economy and a vigorous domestic economy re ected the fact that prospects remained open 
into the future. He added that, although for now catastrophic scenarios were less likely, this did not eliminate the negative effects that the fragility of the world economy would have on Chile. But, in turn, the strength of the Chilean economy made it appealing for investors, which suggested the possibility of output and demand remaining strong for still some time, with implications that were just as important to follow up closely. 
One Board member opined that the economy had been in a similar situation for several months already. On the one hand, facing threats from abroad with periods of varying intensity. One could not rule out the possibility that in the near future political or economic events would result in the external economy being perceived as riskier. On the other hand, with a domestic economy that had decelerated, but not as sharply as previously expected. Neither of these two forces had taken precedence in the last months so as to trigger monetary policy changes or even a bias. Raising or lowering the MPR entailed important disadvantages with respect to the option of holding the rate at. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board members Marshall, Claro and Vial, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 5.0% (annual). 
