MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 215 held on 16 October 2014. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Enrique Marshall, Vice-Governor; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Alberto Arenas. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Miguel Ricaurte, Senior Economist; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/ 
The gures of the past month again depicted a not so favorable external scenario as had been forecast in the latest Monetary Policy Report. A more negative outlook for Germany and Japan stood out, shared by most countries in Latin America. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
The reduction in world demand had pulled down the prices of commodities, a development that in some cases had been coupled with the perspective of greater supply, which further reduced prices, notably for oil. 
Reduced activity and commodity price drops had intensi ed the scenario of low in ationary pressures in developed economies, even including the United States, which had given signs of leaving this situation behind. This change in the in ation scenario had modi ed the markets’ expectations regarding the evolution of monetary policy in the main developed economies, as re ected in declines in their interest rates. These lower rates, however, had been unable to neutralize the negative impact of price movements in other riskier nancial assets. Thus, recent weeks had brought widespread declines in stock markets, emerging currency depreciations, and increases in sovereign premiums. 
In Chile, aside from the negative surprise coming from mining production, output was performing in line with the September Report’s estimates, while the labor market continued to make adjustments. Meanwhile, consumer and business expectations were deteriorating further and investment-related indicators described a worse than expected scenario. This had resulted in a downward correction to the markets’ projections for GDP growth in 2015, which were now in the lower part of the range of projections of the latest Report. 
Taken together, the lower price of commodities and the vision of an economic slowdown in Chile and around the world, was consistent with the reduction of in ation expectations one year out implicit in nancial instruments. In any case, expected in ation at longer horizons remained well anchored around 3%. Furthermore, expectations surveys also revealed expected values for in ation consistent with the target, even despite that in September in ation had been 4.9% annually and was expected to surpass 5% in the short term, in a long string of higher-than-expected gures. 
Still, in general terms, things did not deviate much from the September Report’s scenario, where the Board considered—and so communicated—that the end of the cycle of monetary policy rate reductions was near. 
Over the past few weeks, long-term interest rates had dropped about 30 basis points (bp), partly reversing the increase observed after the publication of the September Report. This drop had been smaller than that of their counterparts in the United States. In this context, the exchange rate—which had depreciated drastically in September and October—had receded to the levels of the days 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
before the last monetary policy meeting. Accordingly, it seemed that a major escalation was now less likely than a few weeks earlier. In this scenario, MPR expectations implicit in nancial instruments had decreased slightly, but not in the surveys, which showed no change. 
Thus, the Research Division proposed as the relevant options for this monetary policy meeting to cut 25bp off the MPR to 3%, or to keep it at 3.25%. 
The no-change option was justi ed in that, given the current high in ation, it was possible to estimate that the cycle of policy rate cuts could end at 3.25% instead of the 3% that most measured expectations anticipated. This measure, which would certainly be a surprise, would help prevent a potential misalignment of in ation expectations. Although this had not happened, it was a risk associated to the fact that in ation had been unexpectedly high and was signi cantly above the upper bound of the tolerance range. 
Moreover, while the in ation surprises of recent months could be explained by speci c developments, it could not be ruled out that there could be a more persistent element behind them. If so, to evaluate it, it would be necessary to collect more information in order to verify the need for a correction in how expansionary monetary policy had to be. However, concerns about a possible de-anchoring of in ation expectations seemed premature, because medium- term conditions, if anything, were less favorable to an increase in in ation. This had to do with the increased pessimism prevailing about local and external output, with recent prices of oil and gasoline, and with prospects of a milder strengthening of the dollar internationally. Plus, as had already been mentioned, the surprise of in ation of recent months was largely attributable to transitory elements. Finally, it could not be ruled out that keeping the MPR at could be construed as a sign of a tighter monetary policy than what the central bank itself wished to communicate. This could generate a fall in expected in ation and the consequent rise in indexed interest rates, jeopardizing the convergence of in ation to 3% in the medium term. 
The option of lowering the MPR by 25bp, changing from a bias to a neutral stand, was consistent with the policy of gradual adjustments carried out by the Bank, which had permitted to guide the market to medium- and long-term interest rate levels that were, in general, consistent with the assumed macroeconomic scenario. In this context, dropping the bias was consistent with the view that 
monetary policy was already providing the necessary momentum for in ation to converge, as had been pointed out earlier. Thus, and recognizing that the short-term in ation forecast was subject to a signi cant degree of uncertainty, the recent behavior of this variable did not pose a serious threat to its future performance and, therefore, it did not warrant a change in the direction and intensity of the monetary stimulus proposed in the September Report. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
About the external scenario, all the Board members agreed that incoming information showed a deterioration in expectations around the world, and that this had signi cantly affected the prices of nancial assets and commodities. 
One Board member noted that the recent wave of pessimism in international markets could be linked to the weaker prospects for the Eurozone and the feeling that the region could be headed to secular stagnation. This added to the doubts that had emerged some time ago with respect to the soundness of several emerging economies and that the IMF and the World Bank in their latest annual meeting had released a more negative assessment of the world economy. He went on to say that the recent high volatility of nancial asset prices led to expect more severe volatility going forward, and that, as the increase in the policy rate in the United States approached, this volatility could increase further. Still, he concluded, one must not overreact to this or to any other event, because the mood changes of the markets occurred quite fast. 
One Board member stressed the striking contrast between the sharp deterioration of the nancial economic climate worldwide and the fact that the IMF’s projections for world growth tended to repeat the tendencies of previous reports. He added that while it could not be ruled out that the volatility and risk aversion of recent days re ected a temporary overreaction to one-time indicators, it should be kept in mind that nancial markets react very quickly to new information, and that IMF projections were constructed through gradual processes and could become quickly outdated. This doubt, he added, could not be resolved until more time passed and more information became available, but it was clear that the outlook for the global economy was riskier than the one that prevailed just a few days back. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member noted that the behavior of the oil price had to be seen not only against the picture of increased global pessimism, but also together with substantial increases in production resulting from technological change, the discovery of new conventional oil reserves and reforms in countries like Mexico, which opened the possibility of developing large known reserves. In his opinion, the fact that OPEC countries were choosing to validate lower prices instead of manipulating production, suggested that maybe the world was entering a period where the oil prices would be signi cantly lower than they had been in recent years. In the case of copper, he added, it was worth noting its relative strength in the present context, although it seemed to be weakening in light of more pessimistic projections regarding China’s copper consumption. 
One Board member said that it seemed premature at the moment to anticipate a signi cant deviation of the global scenario depicted in the September Report, but the downward bias included in the risk balance for Chile’s output in 2015 looked appropriate. Such downward bias, he said, could be justi ed now not only in a possible disorderly adjustment of the US monetary policy, but also in the risk of a global slowdown, that could imply lower commodity prices and also lower imported in ationary pressures. About the consequences of this on the monetary policy strategy, he noted that since these developments were so recent and world consensus forecasts for growth in 2015 were fairly similar to those in the September Report, he thought that the external scenario provided no motive for a change for the time being. 
About the domestic economy, all the Board members agreed that the most striking news came from the new surprise in in ation, accompanied by projections that it would remain above the tolerance range still for some months. One Board member noted that while expectations were still rmly anchored and the most recent behavior of the exchange rate and commodity prices tended to reinforce the diagnosis that the deviations were temporary, this phenomenon had to be monitored with special attention, as it was a critical element of monetary policy. 
One Board member noted that although the latest in ation gures had been unexpectedly high and in ation was expected to end the year above the forecasts in the September Report, in the last few weeks there had been a downward correction of in ation expectations for 2015. Indicators, he continued, suggested that this development might be re ecting, on the one hand, a change in the outlook of international prices of commodities—particularly oil—or, on the other hand, an expected trajectory for the exchange rate that deviated from projections. Both hypotheses, in his view, could be a better explanation for 
the change in expectations than attributing it to a downturn in the outlook for domestic output and demand. However, he added, it was important to note that the volatility of external nancial conditions, the change in the outlook for global growth and the possibility of a slower domestic recovery, could generate new exchange rate pressures in the next quarters that could partially dissolve the decline in in ation expectations for 2015. 
One Board member noted that, beyond any speci c reason for the in ation increase, the Central Bank had to communicate clearly and unambiguously that it was not satis ed with its current level. This was bad news no matter how one looked at it, so there could be no complacency about it. Still, as had been said time and again, there were strong reasons to believe that this was a temporary phenomenon and that by the middle of next year, in ation would be back near the target. First, because it was strongly related to the depreciation of the peso and, as such, its effect on in ation was a one-time event. Even with a low pass-through coef cient due to the economic slowdown, the magnitude of the depreciation was such that its effect on in ation was signi cant. Second, the weak demand, aside from the above effect, helped reduce in ationary pressures. Third, external in ation was particularly low and recent months had seen a major decline in the prices of commodities, especially oil and foodstuffs. Finally, in ation expectations, a key variable in monetary policy, were anchored at 3%. All these factors called for caution, because high in ation rates for a long period of time provided breeding ground for a possible loss of credibility. 
About domestic output and demand, all the Board members noted that incoming news did not change the short-term outlook described in the September Report signi cantly. One Board member added that the tendencies of previous months continued and several indicators pointed at certain stabilization and the end of the declining trends of earlier quarters. He also noted the importance of the behavior of salaried employment, which ceased to slow down several months ago, which possibly played a part in the observed stagnation of self employment. One Board member noted that consumption’s declining trend had continued, together with a failure to go back to previous investment levels, which again were being revised downward. Financial conditions remained favorable, while business and consumer con dence showed further decreases. One Board member noted that the current account of the balance of payments was still adjusting and was likely to end the year with an even smaller de cit than had been estimated in the September Report. This, he concluded, clearly distinguished our country from other Latin American economies that had also slowed, but with a much smaller adjustment in their current accounts. 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Regarding the monetary policy decision, One Board member indicated that the most appropriate options were to reduce the MPR by 25bp this time or wait a while and condition the 25bp reduction to having stronger evidence that in ation was returning to the center of the target range. With the information at hand, he believed it was appropriate to reduce the MPR by 25bp. As for communicating a bias, he believed that there were pros and cons. Pros were that lowering the MPR by 25bp keeping the downward bias was totally consistent with the two to three cuts used in the Report as a working assumption. Also, it was possible that the sharp recent drop in stock markets and interest rates around the world could be a coherent response of the market to a perception that the recovery of the main economies after the crisis would take even longer than assumed in the latest Report. There was also the fact that the high in ation, which could cross above 5% in the immediate future, though uncomfortable, was not decisive, because expectations were anchored. Therefore, lowering the MPR while keeping the downward bias did not seem a sign that the Bank was not interested in in ation. For all this, he continued, he believed that the decision about the bias required reconciling two issues. On the one hand, the message that the baseline scenario in the Report was still valid with respect to growth for both this year and next, so it was only fair to complete the monetary tightening begun some quarters back. On the other hand, there was the fact that it would be necessary to assess in the coming months and quarters whether the external scenario would provide a smaller stimulus than projected. To elucidate this issue, he added, it was useful to de ne the motive for including a bias. In his opinion, a bias was justi ed to the extent that relatively immediate monetary policy actions were anticipated. He believed it was far from obvious that a further 25bp reduction in the MPR was still pending. Overall, he said, he thought the most important point in the monetary policy strategy, especially for next year, was that the external scenario would have to be monitored very carefully, as it was beginning to show the downward risks mentioned in the Report. Thus, he believed that including or not including a bias this time did not restrict at all that monetary policy could react exibly to a material deterioration in the international scenario, signi cantly reducing the prospects for growth and in ation in the medium term. 
One Board member noted that the preoccupation about in ation and its recent surprise was a compelling reason to keep the MPR at 3.25%. However, he believed that the option of lowering the rate to 3% along with an unambiguous message that this action ended the current cycle of reductions was a must. When this cycle began, he added, we expressed our concern about the sharp slowdown of the economy, within a context where annual in ation had been around or 
below 2% for several months. This coincided with a change in international nancial ows, now back to the United States, which had resulted in a sharper than expected peso depreciation and, therefore, in an also sharper and longer- lasting transitory rise in in ation. Now, everything suggested that price increases would return to the target range in 2015. However, with the MPR around a 3%, which meant zero or even negative real interest rates in the coming months, he thought monetary policy had made its best effort to reactivate the economy in the present scenario, without jeopardizing the credibility of the commitment with the in ation target. Accordingly, he thought the right thing to do was to lower the MPR to 3%, giving a clear signal that this ended the cycle and that any future adjustments to this variable would be evaluated as a function of signi cant deviations from the prevailing conditions. 
One Board member noted that different monetary indicators suggested that the monetary policy had properly accompanied this cycle, and that the expected in ation path suggested that ending the interest-rate-reduction process was reasonable and generally expected by the markets. In his view, this would facilitate the adjustment of relative prices, pending changes in the domestic and external scenario that would shed light on the velocity at which the economy would recover next year, and therefore, what their in ationary implications would be. 
One Board member said that the option of holding the MPR would leave the course of monetary policy more open, but would have the severe drawback of introducing uncertainty about the Bank’s actions. Such a decision would not be easy to interpret, considering the signals that had been given, including the one anticipating the upcoming end of the adjustment cycle. Many might interpret that, based on recent history, the ground was being prepared for modifying the economy’s diagnosis. He thought it was unreasonable to affect communication, bearing in mind that what was being discussed was a 25bp cut that, if not done this time around, it would most likely occur in the next. Therefore, he said, he was in favor of lowering the MPR and eliminating the bias. In his opinion, this course of action was much more consistent with the scenario described in the last Report and the policy strategy implemented over the past few months. The recent changes pointed rather to lower medium-term in ationary pressures, so this decision should be read the right way. He said it was important to mention that this decision left the MPR in a perfectly reasonable level, considering the state of the economy and the identi ed risks. This permitted to take a timeout to process more calmly the information that would come in during the following months. Of course, this decision did not constrain or limit the possibility of reacting to a change in conditions, which would be totally justi ed. 
5 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member noted that the Bank had continued, decidedly and persistently, to provide more monetary stimulus to the economy. Short-term and especially long-term interest rates, beyond their inherent volatility, were proof of that. The determinant of this stimulus was, among others, the greater weakness of the economy and its consequent implications for in ation. In this context, he continued, the option of not changing the policy rate was consistent with a scenario in which in ation had exceeded expectations for several months and was forecast to stay above that range still for many more. And with the risk of it being more persistent than expected. If so, before giving a new impulse, the right thing to do would be to wait for more data to be sure that in ation was beginning to reverse the trend. Meanwhile, the option of lowering the MPR was consistent with the message that had been sent, that the Bank’s projections and expectations remained anchored in 3% and that all incoming gures (i.e. commodity prices, world in ation and exchange rate, among others) pointed to a moderation in in ation in the short term. Therefore, he believed that the right decision was to reduce the MPR to 3%. He also thought it very important to specify the message in that this cycle of reductions was coming to an end and next would come a period to evaluate the effects of our monetary policy along with other indicators from the local and the international economy. Certainly, this did not mean that there would be no more moves in either direction going forward. In fact, it was clear that at some point it would happen. Only that this cycle was over and a period of evaluation was in order. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marshall, and Board members Claro, Vial and García, to lower the monetary policy interest rate by 25 basis points, to 3.0%. 
