MINUTES OF [INF*RES*AS] THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary Policy Meeting No. 239, held on 18 October 2016. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member: Pablo García, Board member; Mario Marcel, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Rodrigo Valdés. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Markets Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policy Division Director; Francisco Ruiz, Acting Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Natalia Gallardo, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
Incoming news continued to reveal an external scenario evolving in line as foreseen in the latest Monetary Policy Report. Global activity was expected again to resume its average historic growth rates, boosted largely by the positive effect of the increased weight of emerging economies and the recovery of some that had been in recession. In ation remained below target in most developed economies, but projections indicated that once the negative impact of lower oil prices had passed, in ation would return levels more consistent with the authorities’ objectives. The nancial markets remained calm and mostly expected the Federal Reserve (Fed) to raise the policy rate further in December. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
The reaction of other developed economy central banks was somewhat more uncertain, because of weaker in ation and activity. In addition, there was growing concern that the cost-bene t balance of ultra-expansionary policies was becoming less favorable. In this context, the dollar had appreciated globally and risk appetite had moderated. It was worth noting that the recent adjustments of expectations about monetary policies in the developed world had happened smoothly and that a constructive spirit remained with respect to emerging economies. However, some signi cant risks persisted. 
On the domestic front, output and demand gures were also in line with projections outlined in the Report, as was the evolution of the labor market. Con dence indicators remained depressed, despite a slight improvement and that domestic nancing conditions had not changed much from the previous month. The main piece of news had been the low in ation of September, a signi cant surprise. Accordingly, the market had expected, on average, some rate cuts during 2017, which would place the rate between 3% and 3.25%, depending on the measure used. 
In this context, the Research Division estimated that the two options relevant for discussion were to either lower the MPR by 25bp to 3.25% or keep it at 3.5%. In favor of the cut was that an alternative scenario where the convergence of in ation to the target required a stronger than expected monetary impulse was probable enough to warrant analysis. One particular concern was that activity remained weak in a context where, during the last two years, growth projections had been continually revised downward; potential growth and the neutral interest rate had fallen, making it more complex to calibrate the necessary and effective monetary impulse; con dence indicators were still depressed with no signs of improvement; and investment was not recovering. Despite the relevance of analyzing this scenario, the evaluation of the Research Division was still that the known facts were, generally speaking, highly consistent with the Report, and there was not enough evidence to propose a signi cant change in the path of convergence of in ation. Rather, everything indicated that the impact of the news of the month would be limited, based on the following elements: rst, although in ation had been lower than expected, the data for activity, demand and employment had behaved in line with expectations. Second, the in ationary surprise had concentrated on items with a high exchange rate pass-through coef cient, suggesting that the lower in ation had more to do with the effects of the exchange rate’s uctuations of recent months than to lower pressures coming from activity, whose effects were typically more persistent. Third, services in ation (minus transportation that had a high pass-through coef cient), with a more activity-sensitive behavior, had been in line with estimates for several quarters already. Finally, a glance at the evolution of in ation during the year, 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
especially its goods component, suggested that the levels of exchange rate pass- through were similar to the usual ones. 
Thus, since the lags and intensity with which exchange rate variations affected in ation were variable, the Research Division did not think the September surprise was evidence enough to signi cantly revise its short-term forecast. Thus, considering also that neither short-term activity nor the external scenario had changed, there was no reason to materially modify the vision of in ation’s convergence in the last Report. 
The market also showed limited adjustments to its own projections after September’s in ationary surprise. In ation expectations one year out were down about 15bp and projected activity showed no major change. This, together with the markets’ vision for the MPR that considered, in general terms, one more cut than was expected a few months back. True enough, in this case the interpretation was less direct, since part of the bounded reaction of expected in ation could be attributed to a more expansionary monetary policy. However, two issues were worth noting: First, the real rates did not change much with respect to September, with a growth outlook that had not changed and an in ation forecast slightly lower in a one-year term, but still anchored at around 3% two years ahead, suggesting that the market’s baseline scenario had not changed much. Second, given the usual lags of monetary policy and the assumed timing for the cuts, it was reasonable to think that in ation one year out, which was the one that had changed the most, was not very affected by the changes in the projected policy rate. 
In addition, the option of a rate cut could be advocated on the need to make a technical adjustment, meaning to adapt the nominal rate to uctuations in expected in ation in order to sustain the same real monetary policy impulse. In assessing this argument, it had to be kept in mind that moving the MPR in response to limited changes in expectations had the risk of introducing excessive variability into the policy rate, at the expense of the clarity of the monetary policy communication, since these expectations were volatile. Actually, the changes observed in expected in ation during the month were no different from other past episodes—for example, expected in ation one year out in the Financial Brokers Survey of August 2016 had been 2.8%, up to 3% in September and then down to 2.9%. 
The option to keep the rate unchanged rested mainly on the Report’s scenario that was still valid and was not much different than expected by the market, so it had the additional advantage of not being a surprise and therefore would have little impact on the yield curve. This option was also justi ed in that while the 
in ation surprise had been signi cant, its medium-term implications were not clear, so it was reasonable to pause for more information before considering a change to the path of monetary policy. The cost of this option was that if nally the scenario in which ensuring the convergence of in ation required further stimulus came true but it was not implemented, there was the risk of falling behind the curve. Although it was necessary to weigh this risk, it also had to be kept in mind that such error could be compensated in the future with a more resolute monetary policy action. Moreover, considering that monetary policy was being quite expansionary, this risk did not seem high. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
Regarding the external scenario, several Board members commented on the course that monetary policy would take in the United States. They stressed that the markets had internalized that the Fed would raise the rate in December and would accompany this decision with a reassuring message that the normalization process would be continued at a gradual pace. Thus, according to some Board members, the probability of one of the main external risk factors was reduced. In the opinion of one Board member, as long as the gradual path was maintained, there should be no greater impact on emerging economies. Incidentally, if because of a surprise, such as higher in ation for two or three months, the market anticipated a faster trajectory, the term premiums could be decompressed and have stronger effects on other economies. He also noted that both Japan and the Eurozone were growing slowly by historic standards, but not so far from their current potentials. This had translated into increased calm in the markets which for quite a while had not expected any big policy changes in those regions. One Board member commented that despite doubts about a deepening of monetary policy measures in other developed countries, what was expected was a continuation of expansionary policies, which had helped to strengthen the dollar in the past few weeks. Some Board members noted that the prospect of a “hard Brexit” had been gradually gaining strength, but markets and analysts had been restricting its effects to the United Kingdom. 
As for the local economy, all ve Board members agreed that demand, activity and employment indicators were generally in line with estimates outlined in the Report. One Board member added that the budget submitted to Congress was consistent with the scal goals recently set by the Administration and with the September Report’s baseline scenario. 
All the Board members commented on how September’s in ation had been a surprise that had taken annual in ation to 3.1%. One Board member pointed 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
out that the annual in ation forecasts for the coming months had been adjusted downward, re ecting that September’s surprise would not be reversed any time soon. This was so, he said, partly because between August and September, CPIEFE in ation had dropped even more than CPI in ation. He noted that the reduction in the private sector’s in ation expectations for the next few months, and its possible convergence to the policy target in the medium term, entailed two reductions in the MPR, i.e., an expansionary monetary policy response. Leaving out this possible policy response, in ation expectations would probably be even lower. He added that September’s low in ation could not be thought of as an isolated fact, because it followed a systematic slowdown in in ation occurring throughout the year. He had no doubt that the in ationary slowdown partly re ected the exchange rate appreciation that had begun in February. To some extent, this was the counterpart of the exchange rate’s impulse on in ation of the previous depreciation. However, there was no perfect symmetry, because this deceleration had been sharper than the previous one, coinciding with an extension of limited output growth, a steady weakening of the labor market and a worsening of economic agents’ expectations. 
About what elements were behind the drop in in ation, one Board member said that in his opinion everybody agreed that the exchange rate’s stability and subsequently the relatively more appreciated level of the peso compared with recent years had helped cause the surprise. Of course, it was worth noting that, unlike other occasions, the fact that the peso had been relatively strong had not come accompanied by any symptom of more vigorous domestic demand or better nancial conditions in general facing Chile. Therefore, the expansionary effects that usually came with appreciations were not in sight and there was only the disin ationary impact left. This was important for calibrating the one- off effects of exchange rate uctuations, because they were conditional on the conduct of monetary policy. 
One Board member thought that despite in ation’s September surprise, the economy was still well aligned with the Report’s scenario and inferring a deviation would be premature, partly because the drop in in ation was consistent with the evolution of the exchange rate in recent months. 
Another Board member considered that in ation gures accumulated since the Report’s release toned down the surprise and should be properly weighted. The principle that had long guided the Bank’s actions was that it was dif cult and risky to draw too many conclusions from a single number. Still, everything suggested that the rapid convergence of in ation to the target was mainly associated with the path of the exchange rate. It was hard to tell what aspects could be behind. Faster effects of the stabilization or recent appreciation of the 
exchange rate could explain the earlier fall in in ation, particularly the September gure. But from a longer perspective, and taking into account the natural dif culties in estimating speci c pass-through parameters, the drop in goods in ation followed normal patterns. Services in ation had brought no surprises, and its decelerating process was going according to expectations. The medium- term outlook for in ation, together with activity and employment gures, gave no signs that would warrant a change. However, it was likely that during much of 2017 in ation would be below 3%, as suggested by several measures of in ation expectations at those terms. Since the available data suggested that this was mainly related to exchange rate effects on in ation and were not the result of a more depressed vision about its medium-term fundamentals, he thought that this reason alone did not justify a departure from the policy rate path previously considered. 
Turning to the monetary policy decision, one Board member said that core in ation entering 2017 under 2.5% annually with noticeable expansion of the output gap was a possibility that could not be ruled out. Thus, the question was whether it was convenient to anticipate this scenario by reducing the MPR immediately or await more information to con rm or deny it. A policy rate cut would not be a total surprise for the market, because it had already incorporated the possibility. Even so, he was of the opinion that the Board had the obligation to act with information, conviction and responsibility, avoiding any misstep or overreact to partial data. Monetary policy had to give straightforward signs to the market and make decisions that could be sustained over time, especially if involving a change in shift. Therefore, he voted for holding the MPR unchanged, until new information would con rm or not the change that was forming in the in ation trajectory. 
In the opinion of one Board member it was quite unusual for the news and its implications for the medium-term in ation outlook to suggest either a neutral tone or lower in ationary pressures going forward. In his view, all these effects combined on the monetary policy trajectory were not negligible, and he believed it important to make a coherent, dynamic analysis of the news coming in. In his opinion, if the background data of the real sector, in ation, nancial markets or scal policy had gone in the opposite direction and had been known when writing the Report, it would have been dif cult to believe that the conclusion had been a working assumption for the MPR above the surveys and asset prices or that they could have justi ed analyzing the option to lower the MPR at this meeting. However, although lowering the MPR was one of the options taking this path implied facing the fact that, for better or for worse, from our communication the market did not anticipate immediate action. Meanwhile, the market did not rule that 50bp could be needed. Since there was no certainty of the proper 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
dosage, it could be dif cult to communicate the future direction after a cut of only 25bp this time around. Acting preventively against the risk of clearly lower in ationary pressures might be wise if dif culties to act more aggressively were foreseen, but he did not think such impediments existed. In any case, this Board member commented on the need for a change in the Press Release’s bias. He added that, given the news of the month, one could hardly argue that the option of reducing the MPR had lost importance and a Press Release with the same tone as that of the previous month risked being interpreted as that private expectations were wrong. Another way to highlight this very point was that an inverted forward curve was a sign of a more stringent monetary policy. So were the slowdown of monetary aggregates and the evolution of the real MPR. In his view, it was important to be clear that monetary policy had become less expansionary in recent quarters. 
One Board member said it was important to reaf rm the validity of the scenario in the Monetary Policy Report and the importance of not reacting to speci c data, especially when no signi cant changes in the fundamentals were observed in that scenario. Therefore, his vote was for keeping the MPR at 3.5% and not altering the wording of the Press Release. 
One Board member said that the option of keeping the MPR clearly dominated. While September’s in ation gure justi ed considering the option to reduce, two elements led to overrule it quickly. First, it was a one-off gure; and second, the preliminary conclusion was that the medium-term in ation outlook was not substantially modi ed. Obviously, the information in the coming months would allow con rming this scenario or possibly modifying it better to input the changes in the in ation outlook. The market anticipated a rate cut in the rst half of 2017, but it had to be recognized that it was a minor movement and, in some cases, transitory, that did not necessarily represent a change in the fundamental orientation of monetary policy. He believed that the information available so far did not justify validating such an option, but that could change if a scenario of faster and more persistent fall in in ation, probably associated with further weakness in economic activity forward was envisioned. 
One Board member stated that the option to bring down the rate could be grounded on in ation having returned to the target range, on the expected widening of output gaps, and a still weak economy that drove such widening. Keeping the rate unchanged was consistent with the drop in in ation having occurred only very recently, with the existence of important risks, services and non-tradable in ation being still above 4%, narrow output gaps that seemed not to have a substantial effect on in ation, and in ation forecasts in the current scenario being still at 3% two years ahead. It was also grounded in the fact that 
monetary policy was on an expansionary stance that was expected to remain so, helping to smooth the business cycle. About this, he wanted to share some thoughts. In his view, the Central Bank had conducted monetary policy in accordance with the evolution of the economy and the in ation outlook. This had meant acting with exibility to respond to each moment’s needs: aggressively at times, like when it drastically reduced the MPR even with in ation way above the target; and carefully at times, like when we were asked to tighten the policy due to the persistence of high in ation, or when the MPR had to be adjusted slightly because of observed second-round effects, much milder than other countries in the region whose in ation was even lower. This way of acting was behind the Bank’s credibility and was strongly re ected in in ation expectations at two years. What was most valued was that the Bank did not react to incoming numbers and kept calm at all times. In that context, and not downplaying the importance of the September surprise, to lower the MPR or introduce a bias this time would be to waive this essential principle. As a matter of fact, a virtually unanimous market understood it this way, because it expected neither a reduction nor an expansionary bias. This, incidentally, did not mean lacking the necessary exibility to move towards a more expansionary stance if conditions so warranted; for example, going forward the economy could slow down or the medium-term in ation forecast could be revised downward. But not for a one-off event. He also wanted to make clear that if the exchange rate remained at its current levels, logically one should expect in ation to be below the target next year. This had already happened before, the last time in 2012, with in ation even below 1%. By itself this did not justify a more expansionary policy. It would be only if associated with slower growth—or wider gaps—or second-round effects. About the bias, this Board member said that changing it would be a signal contradicting the Bank’s essence, it would take the market by surprise and, most importantly, it would be inconsistent with a baseline scenario that, at least for now, gave no reason for a substantial change. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Claro and Board members Vial, García and Marcel, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3.5%. 
