MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY 
MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 203 held on 17 October 2013. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board member; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Present the Minister of Finance, Felipe Larraín. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Kevin Cowan, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Claudio Raddatz, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Luis Opazo, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Advisory Department Manager; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Erika Arraño, acting Executive Secretary to the Governor’s Cabinet; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
2. Options 
On this occasion, with the data known after the last meeting, the Research Division presented as relevant options keeping the monetary policy rate (MPR) at 5.0% or lowering it by 25 basis points to 4.75%. 
The rst option was consistent with the slow deceleration of nal demand 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
compared with the last Monetary Policy Report’s projections, the still tight conditions in the labor market and the rebound of some indicators related to private consumption. Another note of caution was the inventory depletion that had been observed in recent months, which could be reversed—at least partially—later on. In these circumstances, postponing a decision on the policy rate would allow checking whether the slowing trend of nal sales would deepen in the coming months, as was implied in the projections of the last Report. 
Meanwhile, the second option was warranted by the progressive consolidation of the baseline scenario assumed in both the Reports of June and September. Since the second quarter of this year, a weaker international scenario had been con gured, characterized by slower world growth, lower terms of trade, less favorable international nancial conditions and the weakening of the global cycle of mining investments. 
Both Reports had pointed out that the materialization of this world scenario would gradually lead to lower growth in domestic output and demand, a less intensive use of internal resources, more contained in ation and, over the medium term, a narrowing of the current account de cit. 
Incoming gures showed that economic activity and imports had continued to evolve at a moderate pace, in line with the scenario depicted in the last Report. Final demand had also slowed down, although less than expected, grounded on the strength that both private consumption and labor market indicators continued to show. 
Business and consumer con dence surveys had been uctuating in recent months, but were still signi cantly below the levels of the rst half of the year. Consensus forecasts for Chile’s GDP growth this year and next had been experiencing downward revisions for some months, but remained substantially below the gures of the rst half of the year. Consensus expectations for Chile’s GDP growth in 2013 and 2014 had been revised downward in the last few months to align projections with those in the Report, and were somewhat below trend growth estimates. 
As for in ation, from June onwards, indicators had underperformed the projections in the Reports. Headline in ation remained in the lower end of the tolerance range, while core in ation remained below 2%. The September Report anticipated a gradual normalization of in ation to 3% in the next 24 months, but this had been pushed back due to receding prices of fuel and other commodities as well as an appreciation of the peso. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
In short, over the past few months, a scenario of lower external impulse, slowing economic growth in Chile and limited in ationary pressures had been consolidated. All these circumstances justi ed the option of reducing the MPR by 25 basis points. This option was appropriate to facilitate the adjustment of the economy and keep in ation in line with the target. Although some diverging elements appeared that called for close monitoring, it was also necessary to take into account that monetary policy affects the economy with a lag, so it was inevitable to act on the basis of incomplete information weighing the costs of being wrong in either direction. 
The option of lowering the policy rate was against the market consensus expectations, but its impact on nancial markets would have to be mild, because surveys and prices were already anticipating reductions in the MPR over the months to come. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
Speaking about the global economy, all the Board members mentioned the dif culties of the U.S. government to reach a scal deal with the Congress. Although an agreement had been nally reached, it was a temporary one, so new stress episodes could affect the markets for the same reasons in the next few months. 
Some Board members noted the postponement of the beginning of the process of withdrawal of the extraordinary monetary stimulus packages in the United States and how this would result in long-term interest rates staying low for a longer period. One Board member added that increases in the policy rate were not expected either in the Eurozone or Japan over a fairly long horizon. Some Board members noted that this fact had resulted most recently in a slight improvement of nancial conditions. One Board member commented that some positive impact on capital ows to emerging economies could be reasonably expected. 
One Board member opined that the easing of tensions in Syria and possibly Iran opened the possibility of a signi cant decline in risk premiums in the oil market, which together with production increases could translate into substantial reductions in fuel prices. 
As for the global growth outlook, several Board members noted that no major changes were observed, as developed economies continued on a path of slow recovery and emerging ones were consolidating the trend of a sharper slowdown. One Board member commented that the most vulnerable countries in terms of 
macroeconomic indicators and dependence on external nancing were facing dif culties and persistent volatility in some of them was to be expected. One Board member drew attention to the downward revision to China’s growth projections recently made by the IMF. The new medium-term forecast, around 7%, re ected the diagnosis of a more structural —as opposed to purely cyclical or transitory—deceleration. 
Domestically, all the Board members argued that output gures were still in line with projections. As for demand, there was agreement that signs pointed to a slowdown. Some Board members indicated that the evolution of labor income suggested that consumption would enter a decelerating trajectory. 
Some Board members drew attention to inventories’ behavior. According to one Board member, this could re ect that sales still remained more dynamic than anticipated by the same companies a few months ago, what was perceived as transitory. However, concluded this Board member, it was still dif cult to sort the different explanations for this phenomenon out, which posed a risk going forward. 
One Board member noted there was evidence of a weakening of mining investment, from the investment project survey and slowing imports of capital goods. Since mining investment uses internal resources much more intensively than mining production, these projects coming to an end should result in higher exports and lower investment, creating room for a replacement by other components of demand. 
Several Board members highlighted the improvements in the trade balance, which could result in a reduction in the risks associated to the current account de cit. 
On in ation, all the Board members commented that it remained low and that there were signs that convergence to the target would take a while longer. In the words of one Board member, this would also be affected by low in ation in the major economies of the world and by the recent appreciation of the peso. He then noted that local interest rates signi cantly higher than international ones, in an environment of low in ation, could further push the peso to appreciate, despite the fact that in a context of less favorable economic conditions for emerging economies, a change in relative prices in the opposite direction (i.e. a depreciation) was desirable. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
As for the monetary policy decision, all the Board members considered that the MPR had to be reduced by 25 basis points, because previously discussed tendencies had materialized. 
In one Board member’s opinion, although in the margin many indicators suggested a moderation of the economic slowdown and there was the possibility of wages and consumption holding on to their trends, this seemed less likely than it had in earlier meetings. This, coupled with the risk of in ation remaining below the target longer than previously estimated, inclined him to reduce the MPR by 25 points this time, but keeping active surveillance on the risks associated with wages and consumption. 
One Board member noted that several of the previously anticipated trends of output, in ation, and demand had consolidated. The economy was in a process of gradual slowdown, with growth expectations slightly above 4% in the coming quarters, with low in ation for many months already, and with signs of slowdown in major components of demand. There was no good reason to believe that these patterns should be reversed in the short term. The MPR was at the lower part of the neutral range. This Board member went on to point out that the current conditions justi ed a limited and gradual change in the MPR, which would facilitate adjusting output, demand and relative prices. In addition, this would reduce the risk of in ation remaining below 3% for too long. However, this Board member felt that the option of keeping the MPR constant was also valid, since the Chilean economy showed no signs of a sharp deceleration or a signi cantly lower in ation outlook going forward. However, he concluded, there was suf cient evidence to believe that the slowdown process was fairly consolidated, and that a slightly lower MPR would facilitate this adjustment. 
In the opinion of one Board member, the option of not changing the MPR could be sustained in fairly strong consumption and a still tight labor market. He believed, however, that the arguments favoring the option of lowering the rate had gained strength. Good examples were the consolidation of less favorable external conditions, the permanence of the MPR on a comparatively high level by international standards, the moderate expansion—below trend—of domestic activity, and the rather low in ation trajectory. This Board member went on to note that, while it was true that the market did not expect a change this time around, this did not limit nor restrict the decision, because in any case the market did expect this to happen soon. Thus, a cut of 25 basis points could be fully absorbed by the market, while exercising leadership also entailed bene ts. Recognizing some risks attached, these seemed rather low and, moreover, there was also the risk of reacting with a lag. 
One Board member felt that the MPR was within the neutral range, but nevertheless very high compared with other economies, and in the developed ones the MPR was expected to remain low over a relatively long horizon, which had kept the dilemma present in the monetary policy discussion for several months already. If this was coupled with the lower short-term in ation expectations and the expected slowdown in domestic demand (affected by the mining cycle as could be derived from partial third-quarter information), internal gaps were being generated especially for the near future, which allowed for a better alignment with international monetary policy rates, which implied a reduction. Accordingly, the costs of making the wrong decision would not be so big. However, future movements would depend on the unfolding of future events. 
In the opinion of one Board member, not changing the MPR was consistent with the dynamism of nal demand—especially consumption—and the still tight labor market. Lowering the rate was consistent with a complex external environment, with low in ationary pressures and contained related expectations. It was also consistent with a slowdown in output and demand, and their projections into the future. He thought the decision was no easy one, because it entailed risks, as did the other. However, the time had arrived to move on to a more expansionary monetary policy, a bias that, moreover, had already been communicated after recent meetings. The trends were going in the expected directions, in ation was low and there were no signs of signi cant changes in the trend. Also, interest rates were particularly high in Chile in an international comparison. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board members Marshall, Claro and Vial, to lower the annual monetary policy rate to 4.75%. 
