MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary Policy Meeting No. 238, held on 15 September 2016. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member: Pablo García, Board member; Mario Marcel, Board member. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policy Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Natalia Gallardo, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
Since the release of the September Monetary Policy Report, the main short- term concern in the external scenario still came from the potential effects of the US Federal Reserve (Fed)’s announcements following its September meeting. While acknowledging that there was a non-negligible probability of a disruptive scenario, the most reasonable evaluation continued to be that, beyond short- term volatility, international nancial conditions would remain lax and global activity would be somewhat higher than in recent times. This was in line with the Report’s baseline scenario, which assumed that the Fed would raise the policy rate once in 2016 and twice in 2017, causing no big or persistent shock on nancial markets. In particular, no signi cant lasting reversal was expected 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
in term premiums and, therefore, no major change in long rates. Still, the risk remained of a different scenario. The response of the monetary policy rate (MPR) to changes in the US monetary policy was far from mechanic. It depended largely on its impact on the medium-term in ation forecast, which was not obvious a priori. 
Locally, between the Report’s and this meeting’s statistical cutoff dates, the July Imacec and the August CPI in ation had been published, and both were consistent with the baseline scenario outlined in the Report. Annual CPI in ation had dropped from 4% to 3.4%, clearly inside the tolerance range. The signi cant drop in annual in ation has to do more with a comparison base effect than with a sharp decline in the price level trajectory. The convergence of in ation was still being driven primarily by the lower tradable in ation (goods CPIEFE), considering that non-tradable in ation (services CPIEFE) was declining moderately. This re ected the vision that the convergence of in ation was mainly associated with the exchange rate’s stability and that the contribution of capacity gaps would remain bounded. 
The dollar continued to trade below its levels at the close of the June Report, even after its recent depreciation. The analyses revealed that the lower exchange rate would pull the CPIEFE down below 3% for the better part of 2017. However, the evidence did not suggest there would be second-round effects that might jeopardize in ation’s convergence to the target in the projection horizon. For this reason, the baseline scenario did not assume a very signi cant reaction of monetary policy on this regard. Anyway, this situation had symmetries with the peso depreciation since mid-2013. During that period, despite higher in ation, the MPR was lowered, because it was thought that there was no need to ght the temporary in ationary effects of the peso depreciation. Of course, there was a risk scenario where the peso would appreciate more intensely and persistently—for instance, if the Fed ended up implementing a much more expansionary monetary policy and triggered a reaction from other central banks along the same lines—which could cause greater second-round effects. A similar situation, although in reverse, had taken place in late 2015, when it was assessed that, given the increased intensity and persistence of the exchange rate depreciation, the impact on in ation was becoming stronger and longer lasting. Such a scenario called for a revision to the policy stance but, at that moment, it did not seem important enough to determine the options to be proposed at this meeting. 
Meanwhile, the current level of the real exchange rate (RER) was 4% higher than the average for the past twenty years, and was within the ranges considered to be in line with its fundamentals. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
About the output gap, it was estimated that its level did not differ much from that expected a year back, despite growth projections having been revised down by around one percentage point in the past year. The reason being that at the same time GDP growth fell by around half a percentage point and, after the extraordinary revision to the National Accounts, other GDP growth in 2015—the gure used in the gap estimation—had been higher. All in all, the gap was foreseen to widen more rapidly going forward, to begin closing well into 2018. Said evolution of the gap, combined with the relatively low in ation elasticity to this variable, explained why no signi cant change was expected in non-tradable in ation. 
In this context, the September Report had increased the estimated monetary impulse with respect to earlier Reports. Thus, it was foreseen that, if the baseline scenario came true, there would be no need to raise the MPR during the projection horizon. This implied not only a stronger monetary impulse than the June forecast, but also than estimates a year before, when the working assumption had been used that, by the end of 2017 the policy rate would stand at 4.25%, that is, 75 basis points (bp) above the current working assumption. Thus, monetary policy would continue to provide a signi cant boost to the economy, which was clear in the fact that the various interest rates were at or very near their historic lows, with the MPR between 50bp and 100bp below its neutral level. 
In this scenario, the Research Division estimated that the option of holding the policy rate at 3.5% appeared as the best choice with the information at hand and the analyses in the last Report. It was also consistent with the markets’ average vision, as re ected in recent surveys to economists and nancial brokers, which placed the expected MPR at 3.5% for a prolonged period of time, in a context of in ation expectations well anchored in 3% and an activity scenario similar to the one depicted in the Report. 
As for alternative options, it was considered appropriate to again present two possibilities, as is traditional. With the information available, it was easy to rule out raising the policy rate, because there was no hint of signi cant risks of stronger in ationary pressures in the medium term. Meanwhile, the string of downward revisions to the growth forecast, the low level and zero improvement of con dence indicators, plus investment failing to recover, could point at a scenario other than the baseline, where the economy grew substantially below the baseline projection. Such scenario had a non-negligible probability of occurrence and required added monetary impulse. 
Thus, based on the information reviewed, the Research Division proposed to analyze the options of keeping the MPR at 3.5% or lowering it to 3.25%. However, it considered that the latter should be dismissed because, as had been widely discussed during the process of drafting the Monetary Policy Report and the information presented at the Meeting, everything suggested that the baseline scenario remained rm and rendered any changes in the orientation of monetary policy unnecessary. Accordingly, the Research Division recommended keeping the MPR at 3.5% and maintaining the neutral bias. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
All the Board members noted the effects that the uncertainties surrounding next week’s decision of the Fed was causing on the markets. One Board member noted that, although a more aggressive attitude in the coming quarters could not be ruled out because of signi cantly improved numbers in the United States, the scenario of a very gradual increase in the US policy rate and expansionary monetary policies in the main developed economies continued to dominate. 
One Board member said that the imminent new decision by the Fed highlighted the differing opinions between some of its members and the market. He noted that to the extent that these differences expressed, in part, different interpretations of the US economic situation and that the horizon for the adjustments foreseen by the Fed in 2016 was becoming shorter, the importance of this meeting lied not only on its immediate implications on the interest rate, but also on the expected 2017 trajectory. Thus, the prevalence of the favorable nancial conditions of recent months, with their in uence on exchange rates, commodity prices and capital in ows to emerging economies, would be subjected to an important test in the coming weeks. One Board member that, more important than the timing of the Fed’s decision to adjust the rate was the tone of the message associated with it. In his view, a tone indicating that the adjustment would be very gradual would probably calm the markets. 
One Board member said that what stood out the most internationally was the reversal of long-term interest rates in the developed world, beyond its fairly bounded impact on Chile’s nancial variables, particularly the exchange rate. In real terms, it was still below its levels early in the year, despite external uctuations. And unlike other currencies, it had exhibited a very light reaction to the reversal of term premiums around the world. Moreover, as had been the trend lately, long-term interest rates had been quite stable also in Chile. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
On the domestic front, all ve Board members agreed that the July Imacec and the August CPI in ation were consistent with the baseline scenario in the September Report. One Board member noted that economic activity had grown less than expected by the market, partly because of a combination of one-time supply-side shocks in the manufacturing sector and the protracted adjustment in the mining industry. He added that demand indicators had held on to their weak, yet positive, pace of growth of previous months. 
One Board member mentioned that, essentially, the outlook for domestic demand and economic activity was marked by a steadily declining mining sector, weak investment and somewhat more stable consumption associated with the evolution of the wage bill. This, he added, was not enough to project a drop in activity in the third quarter of this year or to rule out a gradual recovery in 2017, but it did con rm a scenario of very limited growth, signi cantly below the estimated potential GDP, even after its downward correction. With this, he said, the output gap would expand further, at least until the end of next year. While this occurred, the labor market would hardly recover, and would continue to adjust in its various dimensions. 
One Board member noted that domestic output and demand conditions continued to reveal limited dynamism, which should contribute to a gradual decline in services in ation. In his opinion, however, for as long as no sharper deterioration was apparent in activity and a more marked adjustment in the labor market, a faster and more drastic slowdown in this CPI component could hardly be expected. Accordingly, like in previous months, the medium-term in ation outlook continued to be anchored to a modest growth scenario that did not anticipate a steeper deceleration. Thus, the expansionary monetary policy stance was still needed. At the same time, the limited creation of gaps, together with lower potential growth, also warranted reassessing the neutral rate, which had been adjusted downward in the Bank’s internal estimates. He added that all these elements combined were behind the downward revision to the interest rate trajectory assumed in the last Report, so he believed that a stable path for the MPR was adequately expansionary. 
On in ation, one Board member noted that the velocity of in ation’s convergence to the target was most evident in core in ation indicators. In particular, he added, the CPIEFE change would return to the vicinity of 3% in about half the time it took it to go from 3% to its maximum twelve-month expansion early this year. He thought that for this to happen with the peso appreciating in real terms by less than the preceding depreciation, was a sign that the output gap was in uencing the behavior of in ation, which, although not as strongly as the exchange rate, could increase in the coming quarters. 
One Board member stressed that August’s in ation was in line with expectations and its twelve-month variation had entered the tolerance range. He added that a higher gure was foreseen in September and that it was expected to end the year in 3.5%. He noted that although this was good news after two years with in ation above the range, and although estimates pointed to a gradual convergence to 3%, to draw a de nite conclusion would be premature. The risks were still present and it was the Bank’s duty to keep a watchful eye. Despite a gradual decline, services in ation was still high. The CPIEFE was near the upper bound of the tolerance range, but was expected to decline further. In general, the in ation outlook was in line with the Report’s baseline scenario. 
About the options presented by the Research Division, several Board members estimated the option to lower the rate could be dismissed or was at least premature, among other reasons because there was no indication of a signi cant deviation from the conditions outlined in the last Report. Some Board members, meanwhile, appreciated the fact that this option had been put forward in the discussion. 
Turning to the monetary policy decision, one Board member said that the information at hand was consistent with the September Report and implied no big change in the in ation foreseen in the baseline scenario. In his view, this would advise making a policy decision consistent with the working assumption of a stable MPR. But he recognized the validity of including the option to lower the MPR this time around. In his opinion, it was justi ed because a headline in ation gure around 3% assumed that the more volatile prices—not in the CPIEFE (i.e. not excluding foods and energy)—would push in ation up next year, but not the core component, which would remain below 3% for most of 2017. For as long as this was the case and the output gap continued to widen, he believed it necessary to keep open the possibility of adopting a more accommodative monetary policy stance. All this should not be thought to go against the convergence of the MPR to a neutral level, compatible with the in ation target in a balanced economic context in the long run. In any case, he concluded, as the risks of a stronger than expected in ation adjustment remained bounded, he believed that the right thing to do was to keep the MPR at 3.5%, the same as the working assumption of keeping it unchanged for an extended time span, in line with the September Report. 
One Board member mentioned three issues to consider in evaluating the options being presented. First, from the beginning of July the swap curve had shown a at trajectory. But later on, it considered a reduction of 25bp within six months, indicating that the market had input well before the possibility of a slight reduction in the MPR. The opinions of analysts and polls had been 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
less categorical, perhaps in response to the upward bias that had been changed to neutral only last month. In his view, this suggested that, in a context that obviated the recent Monetary Policy Report, neither option would be surprising. Second, considering the recent publication of the Report, a reduction in the MPR at this meeting would be very contradictory, since it would suggest that the latest Imacec and CPI gures had been more disin ationary than projected in the Report, in circumstances that the Board itself had commented publicly that the data were in line with it. An alternative, more reasonable view was that said movement would imply that the Report’s baseline scenario could accommodate an MPR of a little less than 3.5% without altering it materially. This was so, because there was reasonable uncertainty about the most ef cient trajectory for the MPR in a given baseline scenario. The decision to lower the MPR today should hinge on this argument, which was dif cult to explain in the context of a short press release. Moreover, this debate, though legitimate, required deeper internal conceptualization and discussion. Finally, the third issue regarding the options included conducting a discussion based on risk management. It was clear that if the economy showed stronger disin ationary pressures in the following months, further monetary easing would be advisable. It could even recommend acting preventatively to face such situation by lowering the MPR now, if taking more aggressive action in the future was thought to be more dif cult. As these impediments were not deemed valid, preventive measures were considered not to be necessary at the moment. 
One Board member said that new information available since the publication of the Monetary Policy Report was minimal and did not alter the scenario described therein. In ation had fallen as expected and the news seemed consistent with a gently downward path of in ation in the coming months, also in line with projections. In this context, he believed the right decision was to hold the MPR at 3.5%, keeping the same tone in the press release. About the proposed options, he agreed that a case for raising the MPR at this meeting could hardly be made. As for lowering it, he believed that the options put forward by the Research Division gave good arguments to dismiss it, so it did not seem necessary to go into the matter. Even so, he felt that a scenario where a sharper drop in domestic demand and activity and a reduction in in ationary pressures happened simultaneously was unlikely, because surely these factors would also affect the risk premiums in Chile and thereby impact the exchange rate. 
One Board member said that the path of in ation in the coming quarters remained dependent on the exchange rate trajectory. In his view, beyond the associated volatility and uncertainty, if external monetary conditions were even more expansionary and longer lasting than anticipated, a somewhat faster decline in in ation could ensue and, at the same time, greater support for growth in 
2017. In this scenario, the key question was how monetary policy had to react to a permanent increase in emerging countries’ risk appetite, which was the phenomenon that could be underlying this increased currency appreciation and greater risk appetite. On the one hand, a monetary policy path of stable rates would result in the adjustment falling mainly on the exchange rate, allowing for a stronger appreciation of the peso. On the other hand, a monetary policy that would accommodate the improved external conditions with lower rates would prevent further appreciation of the exchange rate. The question was how to work out this dilemma. In his opinion, in the current scheme—which he considered optimal—, monetary policy should anchor its decision on the MPR path that was consistent with in ation standing at 3% in the medium term horizon, pointing to the stabilization of demand and output conditions, and allowing the exchange rate to uctuate. The experience of recent years showed that in an economy like Chile this could generate variations in in ation around the target that could last a few quarters, but monetary policy was not to deviate from its medium-term in ation objective. Therefore, in the current circumstances, he thought that the only valid option at this meeting was to keep the MPR at 3.5%. 
One Board member noted that monetary policy was still expansionary—and was expected to remain so well into the future. Efforts to smooth the cycle in an environment of above-target in ation illustrated the Bank’s monetary policy framework, where what mattered was the way in ation was pictured in the projection horizon, and, therefore, speci c factors without an incidence on the in ationary trends played a minor role. Regarding the options, on the one hand he was straightforward to dismiss raising the MPR. On the other, he was not entirely convinced that lowering the policy rate was a valid option at this meeting. He thought that, at that point, there was no reason to envision a different scenario than the one in the Report, so such a decision would not only be premature, but also hard to understand by the market. Thus, he concluded, he thought that the only reasonable option was for the MPR to remain unchanged. It had to be kept in mind that services in ation was still high and output gaps were bounded. In addition, the effects on the exchange rate were not only uncertain, but carried one-time effects too. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Claro and Board members Vial, García and Marcel, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3.5%. 
