MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 214, held on 11 September 2014. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Enrique Marshall, Vice-Governor; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member. 
Present the Finance Minister, Alberto Arenas. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Claudio Raddatz, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Natalia Gallardo, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
The large majority of last month’s news had been input in the analysis contained in the September Monetary Policy Report2/. Meanwhile, the data gathered since the statistical closing of that Report had been consistent with its baseline scenario and, therefore, introduced no major changes to its analysis. 
Abroad, the US economy continued to drive growth in the developed world, while the Eurozone and Japan appeared to be losing strength. In ation was still low in the developed economies, although with diverging paths between the US and the Eurozone. Such divergence had been more clearly transmitted to monetary policy. In the US, the quantitative monetary stimulus was easing and there was talk about raising the benchmark rate sooner than expected. 
2/ Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website: http://www.bcentral.cl/ politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
In the Eurozone, the ECB had lowered the policy rate and announced a quantitative easing plan that would begin in October. In the emerging world, the heterogeneity of incoming data from China was consistent with stabilizing growth. In Latin America, the contraction of Brazil in the second quarter and the slowdown of many Latin American economies con rmed the weakening of demand and output in most of the region. 
International nancial markets generally posted limited improvement in recent weeks, as re ected in the stock markets, sovereign and corporate risk premiums and volatility indices. In this context, almost every currency had depreciated against the US dollar, especially in the days leading to the policy meeting. At the same time, most commodity prices had dropped since the August meeting. The copper price had changed little between the two meetings, oscillating between US$3,1 and 3,2 per pound. 
In Chile, output had grown 0.9% annually in July, in line with the forecast in the September Report, but above market expectations. This fact rati ed the weakness the economy had shown in recent months and had driven the downward correction to the growth estimate for this year to a 1.75%-2.25% range. In the latest Economic Expectations Survey (EES), private expectations had moved close to Report projections, for both 2014 and 2015 GDP. The data also con rmed the weak outlook for private consumption, and especially for investment, which was validated by the sharp deterioration of consumer and business expectations, which had dropped again. 
In the labor market, employment’s annual growth had slowed down further in July. Zero growth in salaried employment had compounded with a signi cant reduction in annual growth in self employment. All in all, the unemployment rate had not changed with respect to the moving quarter ended in June. Worth noting was July’s higher growth rate in nominal wages, partly re ecting that last year the increase of the minimum wage came into effect in August, as opposed to July this year. 
The peso had uctuated signi cantly in the last month, between 576 and 595 pesos per dollar. The last gure before the meeting was a little above 590. 
August’s headline in ation had been surprisingly high, with a month-to-month variation of 0.3%. However, unlike the rst half of the year, the surprise owed largely to a handful of items. Overall, this difference, plus the sharper depreciation of the peso, had re ected in a change in the September EES respondents’ in ation estimates for the end of this year. Still, in ation expectations one and two years ahead remained around 3%, which continued to indicate that, as assumed in the 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Report, the private sector saw the high in ation gures as a transitory development that should be reversed towards the second quarter of 2015. 
Long-term interest rates were still low by historic standards. However, 5- and 10-year nominal and indexed interest rates had increased as much as 40 basis points (bp) since the previous meeting. Expectations for the monetary policy rate (MPR) had not varied much in the past few weeks, so a minimum of near 3% was foreseen in the coming months. For this meeting, expectations pointed overwhelmingly to a 25bp reduction of the MPR. 
MPR expectations were in line with the scenario in the September Report, which stated that further monetary stimulus was necessary for the economy. Thus, the Report suggested that, absent a major change in the economic outlook, two—three at the most—additional 25bp cuts to the MPR should be considered. Accordingly, the Research Division presented as the relevant options to reduce the MPR by 25bp to 3.25%, or by 50bp, to 3%. 
The option of a 50bp cut, together with changing the bias from “downward” to “neutral” had a dual purpose. On one hand, to provide the necessary extra impulse to the economy. On the other, to communicate that, if the economic scenario remained fairly unchanged, it did not seem necessary to make additional adjustments in monetary policy aside from those already present in market expectations. This, considering that the median of MPR expectations during this year was 3%. This strategy, while consistent with the analysis in the last Report and, therefore, not likely to be ruled out beforehand, had some drawbacks. For one, as this was not a development largely re ected in private expectations, could be misconstrued. It could be perceived as a sign of an intention to implement a stronger monetary impulse than was implicit in private expectations, which could trigger unwanted movements in the prices of some nancial assets. For another, the change in bias restricted, at least in the short run, monetary policy exibility. Finally, from a macroeconomic standpoint, the impact of speeding up the reduction in the MPR would be milder, as the idea was not to change the behavior of medium- and long-term interest rates. 
The option of lowering the MPR to 3.25% keeping the downward bias, but communicating that the cycle of policy rate cuts was coming to an end meant, on the contrary, continuing with the strategy of gradual cuts in effect for almost a year already. This strategy had allowed injecting substantial monetary stimulus to the economy, while preserving a signi cant degree of exibility. As had been said, this greater monetary stimulus was needed in order for in ation to converge to the target within the projection horizon, in a slowing economy, as depicted in the September Report. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
All the Board members agreed that the data gathered after publishing the September Report was in line with its baseline scenario. On the external front, one Board member drew attention to the weak demand for manufacturing raw materials, notably iron and oil, which together with a signi cant increase in production, had resulted in sharp price declines. This phenomenon called for close monitoring, he added, as it could be transmitted to the copper price, especially because of its potential effects on the foreign exchange market. 
One Board member noted the divergence between a recovering US economy and new signs of weakness in the Eurozone. He added that, beyond the implications on Chile’s external demand, the world economy was entering a period where the monetary policy normalization in the US would be accompanied by further monetary expansion in the Eurozone, a very unusual development, which in his opinion could have signi cant implications on exchange rates, especially on the value of the dollar worldwide. He added that, for the time being, the world continued to provide impulse to the Chilean economy, and the risks of increased nancial noise, particularly the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus in the United States, were still present. 
About the local economy, all the Board members agreed that the biggest news was August’s in ation, somewhat above the estimate. They also agreed that the way it was being analyzed, as a phenomenon linked to one-time factors, meant no big change with respect to the Report’s scenario. Thus, the diagnosis still held, that in ation would remain temporarily high but should converge to the target during the course of the rst half of 2015, considering that demand-pull pressures had weakened signi cantly. One Board member added that, at any rate, such surprise and the acceleration of nominal wage growth called for extreme caution in order to prevent it from propagating in the form of higher in ation expectations, especially considering that the exchange rate was hypersensitive to negative news. 
About other domestic factors, one Board member noted that gures suggested that output was still weak; that new signs of weakness had accumulated in some components of demand; that perceptions about inventory levels were still high, despite some recent depletion; and that consumer and entrepreneurial con dence indices continued to deteriorate. At the same time, he said, domestic nancial conditions were favorable, with low interest rates. He said that the two phenomena —weak output prospects and low interest rates— had contributed to the sharp depreciation of the peso. He thought this point was important 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
because it could not be ruled out that corrections to external nancial conditions, especially changes in monetary policy in the United States, could aggravate or intensify the exchange rate depreciation going forward. 
One Board member drew attention to the labor market, as it continued to show signs of wider gaps and probably this would intensify in the coming months. However, he added, in a context of marked economic slowdown, the way the unemployment rate and wages had evolved was unusual and had to be monitored. 
One Board member appreciated the overwhelming majority that approved the Tax Reform bill in Congress, especially in the sense of providing certainties to the economic agents. 
Turning to the monetary policy decision, several Board members agreed that the options proposed were appropriate. One Board member added that, since everything has proceeded as foreseen, he would advise against adopting any measures that could take the market by surprise. It was important to bear in mind, he added, that third-quarter data would be weak and, moreover, a further weakening of the labor market could be expected. Thus, to assess the steps to be taken under the monetary policy strategy, one should look carefully at the state of the economy, not only where it differed from projections, such as the materialization of a risk scenario, but also with respect to better understanding the state of the cycle. In this regard, he said, he saw three relevant points. First, it was necessary to ne-tune the diagnosis whether the wage dynamic was hindering a smoother adjustment of the labor market, or signi cant cost pressures were being created that could result in increased in ationary persistence. Second, it was important to analyze whether the currency depreciation was having effects on spending and production decisions that led to a recovery as foreseen in the Report, which assumed increased participation of tradable sectors. Third, it had to be assessed whether the monetary stimulus in place was having the desired and expected effects on spending decisions, and to what extent it was softening the headwinds that had been holding back private consumption and investment. 
One Board member noted that, because only a few days back the Bank had given a clear sign that a limited additional monetary impulse was needed, the only possible option at this meeting was to lower the MPR to 3.25%. A 50bp cut would create great confusion and would possibly be counterproductive. He also thought necessary to clearly state that, to the extent that the Report’s baseline scenario remained true, we were very close to reaching the required level of monetary stimulus without jeopardizing the in ation target. 
One Board member noted that the combination of low interest rates, a depreciated real exchange rate and sound nancial conditions were propitious to recovering higher growth rates in the near future, and preventing unwanted adjustments in the labor market. He drew attention to the signi cant rebound in long-term interest rates in the last month, and therefore the strong steepening of the yield curve. In his view, this phenomenon con rmed that monetary policy was being expansionary enough and, moreover, that agents were incorporating into market prices a gradual recovery of the economy going forward. The in ation outlook, he said, pointed in the same direction. Thus, in light of the weak signals from the demand and their implications for medium-term in ation, and in line with the Report, a further easing of monetary policy was warranted. At the same time, he believed that different metrics for monetary expansiveness suggested that there was limited space for this. For the same reason, with the MPR at 3.25% any additional changes had to be analyzed with more caution, which was important to communicate, as it would expand the possibilities for action in the coming months. 
One Board member said that the economy required monetary policy to provide an additional stimulus of limited magnitude. However, the option of a 50bp cut had some drawbacks. It entailed a change in the strategy that had been used to deal with this slowdown cycle and, therefore, it would be unexpected and dif cult to assimilate by the private sector. To maintain consistency with the Report’s contents, it should be accompanied by a fairly neutral bias, which did not seem prudent given the downside risks identi ed for output. Therefore he ruled out this option in favor of a gradual process, as had been the case so far. He added that one should bear in mind that monetary conditions were already clearly expansionary, considering the present level of the MPR and, above all, the level of market interest rates. He concluded stating that it was important to note that the process of monetary tightening, after the cut suggested for this meeting would be very close to completion. This, provided that the conditions described in the baseline scenario of the Report prevailed. 
One Board member noted that over the past year, the Bank had provided additional monetary stimulus to the economy strongly and persistently. Proof of it was the level of short-term interest rates and above all of long-term interest rates, beyond their inherent volatility. The Report stated that some additional—though moderate—stimulus could be necessary. In his opinion, this meeting was the best opportunity for proceeding along this path. It was necessary, however, to point out that the reasonable level for said stimulus was approaching. Therefore, with the data and projections at hand, and discounting the decision emanating from this meeting, the room for such extra stimulus 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
was beginning to shrink, although he believed it was not totally exhausted. Accordingly, any information that would come in and the resulting changes to projections would be critical in the future evaluation. In this context, the option of cutting 25bp off the MPR clearly dominated this time. The option of cutting 50bp would be understood only if at the same time the expansionary bias would be eliminated as a clear signal that the desired monetary stimulus in the current conditions had been reached, and now began a period of evaluation where no new changes in monetary policy were foreseen, at least in the very short term. The merit of this option was that it gave the market some certainty. But it had at least two problems. One was that it could give misleading signals, as the public could infer that the vision of the economy that prevailed only a week ago had worsened, which was not the case. The other problem was that it drifted away from a strategy that had succeeded both in terms of the messages delivered and in the results of the necessary extra monetary stimulus that had been applied. For the same reason, the option of a 25bp reduction clearly dominated, because it was consistent with the desired additional monetary impulse, with the signals delivered and with the strategy that had been used during the whole cycle. In any case, he concluded, he thought necessary to give a sign that, in the present conditions, the need for monetary stimulus was declining steadily. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marshall, and Board members Claro, Vial and García, to lower the monetary policy interest rate by 25 basis points, to 3.25%. 
