MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 226, held on 15 September 2015. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member. 
Present the Finance Undersecretary, Alejandro Micco. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Elías Albagli, Modelling and Economic Analysis Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; Claudio Soto, Advisor to the Finance Minister; Natalia Gallardo, Senior Economist; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
Background information made available since the statistical closing of the September Monetary Policy Report, particularly August’s high in ation rate and the upward movements of some measures of medium-term in ation expectations, con rmed the concern about the persistence of in ation at high levels. 
As had been discussed in last the Report, recently known information were consistent with a somewhat less expansionary monetary policy, which implied reducing the monetary stimulus by 50 to 75 basis points (bp). In this context, the main question at this meeting was whether or not the news justi ed making 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
such reduction sooner than had been communicated in the Report, i.e., raising the policy rate towards the end of this year or at the turn of 2016. 
Accordingly, the Research Division considered that the relevant policy options at this Meeting were to either raise the monetary policy rate (MPR) by 25 bp to 3.25% or hold it at 3%. In any case, based on the discussion in the Report, it was clear that one way or the other there should be an upward bias because, regardless of the decision, in the most likely scenario MPR increases would be necessary in the short term. 
Regarding recent developments, in general, data published after the statistical closing of the Report were consistent with the scenario of low activity and higher in ation presented in it. Moreover, although August’s in ation had exceeded projections, the surprise had been almost entirely associated with some very volatile components, considering that core in ation, while high, was evolving in line with expectations. However, there were two recent episodes worth singling out. 
On the one hand, although the different measures of in ation expectations one year ahead continued to point at a signi cant reduction in annual in ation— uctuating between 3% and 3.7%, well below the current 5%—, some indicators of expectations two years ahead had risen. On the other, while various surveys suggested an MPR path similar to the one proposed in the September Report, the path implicit in the prices of nancial assets indicated a greater and earlier reduction of the monetary stimulus than foreseen in that Report. Both developments were relevant inputs in the evaluation of policy options. 
As had been mentioned before, it was clear that an increase in medium-term in ation expectations above the 3% target posed a signi cant risk for the in ation trajectory, with the potential to signi cantly narrow the space for carrying out a countercyclical monetary policy. In the current context, headline and expected in ation data suggested that this risk had increased somewhat, especially because some indicators implied that, in this cycle, in ation could be a little more persistent than previously thought. 
Despite the importance of this phenomenon, the Research Division considered that the factors moderating this risk were still present, especially when compared with past episodes. In their view, if in ation expectations remained well anchored over the medium term, there were no other elements revealing any greater in ationary pressures in the medium term. In fact, the greater weakness of domestic and external activity and the downward correction in commodity prices pointed in that direction. Thus, while it was true that September’s evaluation 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
of the output gap gave no signs that it was signi cantly offsetting the higher in ation resulting from the depreciation of the peso, that evaluation also showed that they would not constitute a source of additional in ationary pressures. 
Regarding the Report’s baseline scenario, the MPR trajectory implicit in the nancial instruments considered not only an earlier reduction in the monetary stimulus, but also a sharper one. The Research Division considered that validating such a path could have an unintended effect on output and thus on medium- term in ation. This, especially in a context where downside risks to output had increased and external nancial conditions had tightened, which could affect the longer-term rates more intensely. 
In this environment, it was thought that the recent evolution of medium-term in ation expectations advised anticipating the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus with respect to assumptions in the Report, but care had to be taken for the press release not to validate a much more contractionary trajectory for the policy rate than proposed in the Report. In this context, the Research Division was of the opinion that raising the MPR today, contradicting what the great majority of the market expected, could be construed as the Board thinking that the analysis in the last Report had become obsolete in just a few weeks, validating the need for an essentially different MPR trajectory. Therefore, the Research Division was in favor of keeping the rate at 3% while including an obvious bias stating that, in line with the analysis in the September Report, the convergence of in ation to 3% within the policy horizon required to lessen the high monetary stimulus in place, considering that this could occur somewhat sooner than assumed in that Report. 
2. Monetary policy decision 
Domestically, all the Board members agreed that since the release of the September Report, the news on in ation were the most important. Some Board members commented that, in any case, the surprise in the month’s in ation had come from the most volatile component of the CPI, namely fruits and vegetables. Thus, in the opinion of one Board member, while short-term in ation was above forecasts, the vision did not change with respect to the determinants of medium-term in ation that were implicit in the projections. One Board member recalled that at the previous meeting they had discussed the general concern over the delay in the convergence to the target. After the August gure, the twelve-month in ation forecast had gone up again, which also coincided with an increase in in ation expectations, visible both in market prices and in the frequency distribution of the various surveys. 
One Board member noted the strong impact that the exchange rate depreciation had had on in ation, in a context of a substantial slowdown in output and demand, but without creating important gaps that could contribute signi cantly to bringing in ation down. In this regard, he underscored the path of labor market indicators such as job creation and the trends of nominal wages and services in ation. These facts were consistent with the assessment presented in the Monetary Policy Report of slower growth in potential GDP. However, he thought that the economy was going through a weak phase, re ected mainly in investment, both external and internal. Together with a signi cant change in external conditions, this had called for a clearly expansionary monetary policy, which had favored an adjustment of relative prices and had helped smooth the adjustment in output and demand the economy had endured in recent quarters. Overall credit conditions, market interest rates, and the 10% growth in the money base and nominal loans con rmed this. 
One Board member said that another important news of the month was the adjustment of the various indicators of private expectations relating to the conduct of monetary policy. Surveys to analysts and operators had aligned themselves pretty close with the message in the Report, but asset prices had shown a more drastic reaction. 
About the world economy, several Board members reviewed the developments in China and expectations about the actions of the Federal Reserve in the upcoming September meeting, noting that the main sources of volatility remained. One Board member added the downgrade to Brazil’s rating by a credit-rating agency and the surprising increase in the MPR in Peru. Another Board member stated that the weakness of China, along with certain structural problems in some economies, had contributed to the sharp weakening of some emerging markets. He went on to note that the volatility of asset prices, such as currencies, and also the prices of commodities needed to be weighed judiciously. This, because in the short term they could trigger signi cant movements in the exchange rates with short-term effects on in ation, and could signal a worsened external outlook for the medium term. 
Turning to the monetary policy decision, all the Board members agreed that the two options proposed by the Research Division were valid. One Board member noted that the scenario in the recent Report was still valid, which meant, as had been publically stated, that the beginning of a gradual normalization of the signi cant monetary stimulus in place would occur fairly soon. Under the monetary policy regime used by the Bank, it was crucial for the MPR to follow a path consistent with in ation converging to the target within a two- year horizon. Thus, the message in the Monetary Policy Report that the policy 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
rate would be normalized towards a more neutral stance should come as no surprise. The month’s information motivated to prefer the option of keeping the MPR at 3%, because, in his opinion, an increase would convey the wrong ideas that (i) the baseline scenario of the Report was no longer valid, and (ii) a much more intense monetary tightening was needed than previously assumed. For example, validating the expectations implicit in nancial asset prices would entail a nearly 50 bp higher MPR than the one implicit in the Report’s trajectory, with an effect of similar magnitude on the 2016 growth forecasts, and a slightly smaller impact on in ation. Although one could think of risk scenarios where such a monetary adjustment would be appropriate, it constituted a signi cant departure from the baseline scenario, which he thought was not coming true. 
One Board member said that, under these circumstances, the greatest risk was new in ation surprises consolidating high in ation expectations for longer than expected. Such surprises could have many causes, including: one-off hikes in food prices, further depreciations of the peso—coming, for example, from an increase in interest rates by the Federal Reserve—, or a slower adjustment in nominal wages than implicit in the forecast. Although none of these elements was part of the Report’s baseline scenario, they all had signi cant probability. If higher in ation expectations consolidated, the monetary adjustment would need to be sharper and more costly in terms of lost output and employment. Thus, he believed it was necessary to think ahead, and begin raising the policy rate immediately. He agreed that there was the risk of this being construed as a con rmation of the interest rate trend re ected in nancial assets at different maturities, and that according to the Board was unnecessary. In his opinion, however, to anticipate what the market was expecting reduced the probability for interest rates to make adjustments of the magnitudes projected by the markets at that time, and that could be easily communicated. 
One Board member said the assessment of the cyclical position of the economy, with bounded capacity gaps expected to expand slightly in the coming quarters, and the in ationary effect of the exchange rate depreciation, suggested that, although monetary policy should stay in expansionary mode going forward, the convergence of in ation to 3% called for a gradual rise in the MPR. In a context of high in ation, risks of increased persistence and rising expectations, the idea of a rise in the MPR became increasingly valid, especially considering that the one-year real interest rate had fallen sharply in recent months. Prospects of higher in ation in the near future could signi cantly restrict monetary policy’s degrees of freedom to maintain an expansionary stance for some time. In the latest communications with the market, the Bank had given clear signals about its evaluation of the in ation dynamics, the cyclical position of the economy, and the need to gradually raise the interest rate. However, he believed that the 
strategy of anticipating the rate increase to this meeting, while valid, had as its main drawback that it could be interpreted by the market as a sign that the MPR increase had to be substantially larger and faster than desirable. In other words, it would be dif cult to inform the market today without signi cantly questioning the assessment of the last Report, which he thought was a bad idea. 
In the opinion of other Board member, neither of the options proposed clearly dominated the other. Keeping the rate at was based primarily on sustaining certain consistency with the Report, without reacting to data that could be very temporary, or validating an interest rate curve well above the one included in it. It was also based on the fact that expectations two years ahead were still anchored at 3%, despite some measurements showing some increase. Finally, this option hinged on the notion that, although the gap was small then and no material expansion was expected, it would help mitigate to some extent future in ationary pressures. The baseline scenario did not include a signi cant depreciation of the peso in the near future either. The option of raising the MPR had to do with the need to withdraw part of the strong monetary impulse in place for in ation to converge to 3% within the projection horizon. In addition, he thought that the sooner this was done, the stronger the signal of anti-in ationary vocation it would convey. Plus, the risks of an additional depreciation with an impact on in ation were not small. And there were some signs, although still negligible, of increases in in ation expectations two years ahead, which by itself was a risk for the in ation objective. The persistence of in ation above the upper bound of the target range for over 18 months already posed a risk for in ation expectations. Meanwhile, the gap was small and would not help much in the anti-in ationary process. At the same time, wages and unit labor costs continued to grow above those compatible with in ation at 3%, and the labor market remained dynamic. Last but not least, the option of raising the rate was based on the fact that the current monetary stimulus was substantial and in this scenario it could be too much from the perspective of the Bank’s goal. In the opinion of this Board member, there were strong arguments both ways, so regardless the MPR was raised or maintained at this meeting, there should be a clear bias of the rates being increased in the very near horizon. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Claro, and Board member García, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 3%. Board member Vial voted for raising the policy rate by 25 basis points. 
