MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY MEETING Monetary Policy Meeting No. 250, held on 14 September 2017. 
Present: Mario Marcel, Governor; Sebastián Claro, Vice-Governor; Joaquín Vial, Board member; Pablo García, Board member; Rosanna Costa, Board member. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Juan Pablo Araya, General Counsel and Attestor; Alberto Naudon, Research Division Director; Solange Berstein, Financial Operations Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Markets Division Director; Gloria Peña, Statistics Division Director; Miguel Fuentes, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Enrique Orellana, Strategy and Communication of Monetary Policy Manager; Elías Albagli, Modeling and Economic Analysis Manager; Diego Saravia, Economic Research Manager; Matías Bernier, Domestic Financial Markets Manager; Rodrigo Alfaro, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Manager; Diego Gianelli, Head of the International Analysis Department; María Francisca Pérez, Advisor to the Finance Ministry; Carlos Medel, Senior Economist; Yennifer Chahuán, acting Secretary General. 
1. Background and options 
Both the background minutes and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website2/. 
The Meeting took place a few days after the publication of the September Monetary Policy Report. This Report had estimated that the economy remained weak, but that various external and internal factors permitted to forecast a gradual recovery in the following quarters. This would allow the activity gap to stabilize around its current level this year and to start closing more clearly during the second half of 2018. 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl 
In ation had been lower than expected, although because of speci c factors in its non-core component. In fact, the CPIEFE had evolved in line with estimates in several Reports. All in all, it was projected that it would remain low for several months, largely because of the peso appreciation. During this cycle, the evolution of the exchange rate had been the main determinant of core in ation, but normally its effects were more associated with changes in short-term in ation than with a more persistent trend. 
Thus, and beyond the volatility of the short-term data, it was estimated that, with a monetary policy that would remain expansionary for quite some time, the economy was on the way to recovering its dynamism and in ation was set to return to 3% within the projection horizon. In the light of the latest Economic Expectations Survey (EES), the market appeared to have a similar view. 
Regarding monetary policy, this scenario was consistent with a Monetary Policy Rate (MPR) that “would remain around its current levels and would begin to rise towards neutrality only once the economy began to close the activity gap.” As always, monetary policy had to be exible to changes in the macroeconomic scenario. Given the still weak context of activity, a recovery for which there were good fundamentals, but still not shown strongly in the data, and in ation still low and expected to remain so in the following months, the Report put special emphasis on the materialization of scenarios of low in ation that jeopardized convergence to the target. 
The data made available between the statistical cutoff date for the Report and the Meeting did not alter the previous analysis. The movement of asset prices in Chile and the world stood out, in particular, the global depreciation of the dollar and the appreciation of riskier assets, resulting from a market view that seemed to assume too passive an attitude of the central banks of developed economies, especially the Fed, and an over-optimistic view about the dynamism of emerging economies, especially China. 
In Chile, as in most emerging economies, this re ected in the appreciation of the peso, prompting a downward revision to the short-term in ation forecast. After the publication of the Report, the fall in short rates of previous days had been reversed, but in general terms the nancial conditions remained consistent with the monetary expansion foreseen in the Report. This mattered because monetary policy operated through the overall nancial conditions of the economy, not only via the nominal short-term rate. The advanced data for August and incoming information also pointed to a trajectory of activity in line with the Report’s forecasts. 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
In this context, the Research Division considered that the options presented at the previous meetings were still valid: to either keep the MPR at 2.5% or lower it by 25 basis points (bp) to 2.25%. For the reasons detailed the month before, the rst option had to be accompanied by a neutral bias, while the second one should entail a neutral bias. 
Keeping the MPR unchanged with a neutral bias was mainly justi ed by its consistency with the projection scenario of the September Report. This scenario projected core in ation to be low for several months, which would be intensi ed by the recent appreciation of the peso. However, since the effects of such an appreciation were generally short-term, and a closure of the gap in the other sectors was expected, it was not deemed to compromise the convergence of in ation to the target. 
In this context, it seemed appropriate to maintain the MPR at 2.5% and the neutral bias, because under the monetary policy strategy expressed in this option, the most likely scenario was that in the coming months there would be no change in the MPR. It should be recalled that the operational objective of monetary policy was for projected in ation two years ahead, not short-term in ation, to stand at 3%. This allowed in ation to be most of the time within the tolerance range, without generating excessive GDP volatility and reducing the risk of overreacting to speci c data that would not alter the convergence of in ation, which were subject to misinterpretation or from which it was dif cult to extract any long-term signals. 
In line with the analysis of previous months, the latter option was mainly based on a risk management argument, namely the risk of a delayed recovery of growth in a context of low in ation. In other words, it was not the risk of low short-term in ation per se what justi ed this option, but that if it came true it could affect the convergence to the target. Thus the relevant question was when could such a situation occur and evaluate it in the light of current data and the analysis in the Report. In particular, it required analyzing the relationship between the current low in ation and the recovery of activity. 
To begin with, the low in ation could be proof of a current and expected activity gap more negative than estimated, meaning that the current low in ation records would be evidence that would call the recovery scenario into question. The analysis tended to rule this idea out. It was clear that the evolution of in ation had been closely linked to the exchange rate and some speci c factors. In addition, different measures of capacity gaps revealed that, although they did 
exist, they were relatively limited. Not in vain, non-tradable in ation showed only a gradual adjustment, especially when compared with tradables in ation. 
Secondly, considering that the data showed that the main determinant of changes in in ation had been the exchange rate, one could wonder what the relationship was between the foreign exchange and growth. In particular, if the exchange rate was a re ection of better growth expectations (or there was a third factor, such as the copper price, that propped up growth and appreciated the peso), there would be a situation where in ation would be low in the short term, but the recovery ensured its convergence in the medium term. This was symmetrical to what had happened early in this cycle, when in ation was above the target and rising because of the sharp depreciation of the peso, but it had been judged that the behavior of the exchange rate was the re ection of the weak economy, which would tone down in ation in the medium term. In this context, monetary policy had become more expansionary, not the opposite. 
However, there was a third scenario that sustained the option of taking preventive action, which in the opinion of the Research Division would require more than a 25bp cut to be effective. In this scenario, there was a certain disconnect between the evolution of the exchange rate and the growth outlook. In particular, the appreciation could be just a re ection of an overly optimistic nancial market. This would put downward pressure on the exchange rate, but would not have much effect on growth. By itself, as long as it remained bounded, this was not a big problem, because if the economy recovered, in the medium term the demand pressures should help in ation to converge. However, there were scenarios where it did pose a problem and were the reason to evaluate a preventive action. This, within a context in which the appreciation of the peso occurred in conjunction with a negative scenario for local growth (for example by a drop in con dence levels), so that at least for some time there would be a peso appreciation and a gap failing to close. Alternatively, a string of exchange-rate shocks of major magnitude could trigger a more persistent change in in ation, jeopardizing the convergence by second-round effects, mirroring the events of end of 2015 but in the opposite direction. 
Finally, as had been pointed out the previous month, evaluating the communicational effects of risk-based alternatives was complex; moreover, the analysis in the last Report suggested that, in a context of low rates and a highly responsive Central Bank, the bene ts of preventive actions were not very large. Still, these elements certainly had to be taken into account and carefully assessed on a regular basis. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
2. Monetary policy decision3/ 
About the external economy, several Board members drew attention to the movements in asset prices. One Board member stressed that the monetary policy responses of the Fed and the European Central Bank, plus the market’s perceptions and the interaction between them had to be carefully examined because they were important for understanding the changes in relative prices going forward. He also noted that the global depreciation of the dollar and the rise in the copper price had strengthened the peso. In any case, he added, as considered in the Report’s baseline scenario, it was not obvious that the high price of copper would last, as its accelerated increase responded only partially to fundamentals, and partially to speculative positions. 
One Board member said that asset price movements largely re ected expectations about the trajectory and uctuations of the monetary policy rate in the United States. In his view, after a prolonged period in which the perception mounted that the Fed was applying a policy of very slow increases, which resulted in declines in long-term rates and a depreciation of the dollar, in recent days these movements had tended to revert partially, in part due to better data on activity, employment and in ation in the US and the main developed economies. These same factors had in uenced commodity prices which, at least to some extent, tended to behave as nancial assets. As a result, the copper price had adjusted, marginally undoing some of its earlier increase. In his view, this revealed the sensitivity of these markets to the Fed’s decisions and, as had been noted repeatedly, opened the door to a risk scenario in emerging countries in case of policy errors or misinterpretation of signals by the market. 
One Board member said that the strong copper and the global depreciation of the dollar had contributed to an unusual peso appreciation, both bilaterally and multilaterally. He added that this trajectory was not different from other commodity-exporting countries’ currencies, re ecting a global phenomenon, and could also be partly in uenced by faster expected growth in emerging countries —Chile included— than was implicit in the Report’s baseline scenario. 
About the local economy, several Board members pointed out that a small amount of information had been received since the September Report, and it was in line with the assumptions therein, in particular August’s in ation. 
3/ In order to preserve the regulatory individual anonymity in the discussion, all ve Board members are herein referred to as males, including female member Ms. Rosanna Costa 
Several Board members expressed that the recent appreciation of the peso had had an effect on short-term in ation expectations, but at two years they hadn’t changed. One Board member said that this spoke of a transitory downward effect, but without more persistent effects or that could compromise the target in the two-year horizon. 
On the output and demand side, one Board member noted that the data were still consistent with a scenario of gradual convergence to potential growth by mid-2018, and that marginal gures seemed to reinforce this scenario. About this, another Board member emphasized that August’s foreign trade data, within its usual volatility, showed strong export performance in virtually all lines and persistent import growth trends of consumer and capital goods. One Board member mentioned that employment and wage gures evidenced the stability of the labor market. 
One Board member said that it was important not to over-interpret marginal data because of their high volatility. However, he added, there were two things that could be derived from July’s higher-than-expected Imacec gure that had surprised the market. One was the recovery of mining output, which could be sustained over time. The other was that the gure for other GDP lent support to the hypothesis that the poor gures of the rst half were dominated by speci c factors. All in all, he went on, the economy continued to give mixed recovery signals, and the baseline scenario assumed a slow recovery beginning in the second half of this year. For the same reason, he thought it important to emphasize the gradual nature of the recovery as the central message of the Report. 
Regarding the monetary policy decision, all the Board members considered that the monetary policy options for this Meeting had as their immediate reference the new Report. As a working hypothesis, a monetary impulse similar to that of June’s Report was assumed, while in the risk balance it identi ed a downward bias for in ation in the short term, which, if materialized, could affect convergence to the target, in which case it would require a deepening of the expansionary monetary policy stance. 
One Board member mentioned that the option to keep the rate unchanged was fully consistent with an economy moving towards a gradual recovery and in ation converging to the target, provided that one-off factors such as the more volatile price movements and the temporary impact of the peso appreciation disappeared. Market prices in general offered a similar reading. About the option of lowering the policy rate based on risk considerations, he pointed out that, although in ation risks could not be entirely eliminated with a downward bias, 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
the bias was limited to the short term, which should not be cause for concern, as long as it did not compromise the achievement of the target in two years’ time. Moreover, there were no signs that such risk could materialize. Second: by taking monetary policy actions to address risk scenarios one was compelled to assume the cost of moving away from the baseline scenario in the short term, demanding a bigger adjustment later if that risk did not materialize, or an even bigger one if ultimately the economy entered a dynamic in the opposite direction. Put differently, it would be necessary to suf ciently calibrate the costs and rely on more concrete signals regarding their materialization. In his view, all this was prior to entering into the more communicational considerations, which were always necessary, but not enough. 
One Board member emphasized that for this Meeting the Report was a very important reference. Despite the few days passed, in his opinion there had been some important developments. One was the market’s reaction to the Bank’s projections. It was not easy to accurately identify the factors behind market movements, but from the reading of different opinions —from analysts and the media— there was signi cant probability that by assuming somewhat higher-than-consensus growth, the Report’s baseline scenario was seen as optimistic and had therefore motivated an adjustment in interest rates and the exchange rate. Although the adjustment had not been a very large one, it pointed unambiguously towards a less expansionary monetary stance and somewhat milder in ationary pressures than those implicit in the prices of nancial assets. Internally, some of this was happening too; in particular, in the CPIEFE there was a difference that he thought could be materially relevant and should be assessed at future meetings if it continued to diverge. He added that, of course, this could be associated with the immediate effect of the exchange rate appreciation, but it was important to consider that the activity gap, the exchange rate and expectations were the three main determinants of medium- term in ation, and also the three channels of monetary policy pass-through. Monetary policy worked through not just one of them, but through all three. Of course, he continued, they operated with varying lags and magnitudes, which varied with time, and it was necessary to gauge those impacts as information accumulated, to adequately guide monetary policy and its communication to the public. In this way, the vision depicted in the Report was still totally valid and holding the MPR steady was consistent with it. 
One Board member pointed out that after just a couple of weeks from the statistical closure of the Report, what had to be done was to assess whether the new information did or did not affect the vision described therein and the corresponding orientation of monetary policy. In his opinion, the review of earlier 
numbers did not suggest any signi cant deviation from the baseline scenario, and neither did the occurrence or disappearance of the risk factors considered. Accordingly, he voted to keep the MPR at 2.5% and give a message reaf rming the validity of the scenarios described in the Report. 
One Board member stressed that the market had adequately internalized the monetary policy message of the Report, i.e., that a strategy that favored keeping the MPR low for a long time was the most effective way of contributing to the recovery of the economy and ensuring the convergence of in ation to 3%. In that sense, more aggressive strategies in the short run inevitably led to a signi cant steepening of the curve as of late 2018. Otherwise, the monetary impulse would not be consistent with the in ation target. Therefore, he thought it was wrong to argue in favor of changing the MPR to justify a risk scenario without taking charge of the need to communicate that it would require a substantive increase in the MPR from mid-2018 onwards. The macroeconomic effects of this and its communicational implications were dif cult to assess, which was part of the analysis after the monetary policy strategy outlined in the Report. He added that it was different to evaluate a more expansionary monetary policy —with a systematically lower MPR— whether it responded to a weaker economic recovery or to a lower medium-term in ation outlook. This was a risk that was discussed in the Report and that required follow-up, but for now he believed that there were no elements to validate that scenario. He added that while the outlook for short-term in ation had been corrected downwards in recent months, it had not been the result of a vision of further weakness but mainly the effect of the stronger peso. In fact, the stability of in ation expectations two years out around 3% was consistent with that view. The dynamics of the fall in short-term in ation, however, required close monitoring and its implication for monetary policy had to be carefully evaluated, considering that a mechanical reaction of monetary policy to the exchange rate trajectory had been left behind several years ago in Chile. 
One Board member said that he agreed that the options to be analyzed were to either maintain the MPR at 2.5% or reduce it by 25bp to 2.25%, where it would be appropriate to assess whether the recent information was suggestive of a materialization of the risk balance identi ed in the Report. Thus, it was important to stress that the relevant gures for monetary policy were not the speci c CPI data of the coming months, but determining if they re ected any factors that could lead to a fall in in ation below the 3% target in the two-year policy horizon. In other words, the Board continued to make its monetary policy decisions based on medium-term projections, recognizing that there was a risk that factors might be operating that could divert the in ation path away 
5 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
from forecasts in the baseline scenario. Under these circumstances, reducing the MPR would be justi ed only if a scenario was formed where, on aggregate, additional pressures would have arisen from the in ationary slowdown and there were factors that would make such a decline persistent. Particularly important would be the interrelationship between lower in ation and further weakness of activity that would widen the activity gap. In his view, no evidence had emerged that would strongly suggest a con guration of these factors. Although the appreciation of the peso induced lower in ation, it was mainly explained by the combination of a depreciated multilateral dollar and a higher copper price, and its impact would materialize in line with the usual pass-through. The latest activity data, including the July IMACEC, did not suggest a further weakening of activity but rather rati ed the path of gradual recovery described in the baseline scenario. This made it doubtful that the disin ationary pressure from an exchange rate appreciation would extend over the policy horizon. Certainly, the Board had to be on the lookout for new signals altering this perspective and pointed to the materialization of the risk of short-term in ation declining. 
3. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Marcel, Vice-Governor Claro and Board members Vial, García and Costa, to hold the MPR at 2.5%. 
