MINUTES OF THEMONETARY POLICY 
MEETING Monetary policy meeting No. 202 held on 12 September 2013. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board member; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón; Financial Operations Division Director; Kevin Cowan, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Claudio Raddatz, Economic Research Manager; Luis Opazo, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Communications Advisory Department Manager; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Ivonne Vera, Senior Economist; Erika Arraño, acting Executive Secretary to the Governor’s Cabinet; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, may be accessed on the Bank’s website1/. 
2. Options 
On this occasion, with the latest data known after the last meeting, the Research Division presented as relevant options keeping the monetary policy rate (MPR) at 5.0% or lowering it by 25 basis points to 4.75% 
2/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
As had been pointed out in previous meetings, the option to lower the MPR could be justi ed by the con rmed weakening of the external impulse, the maturation of the mining investment cycle and prospects of reduced dynamism of the labor market and private consumption, all of which was expected to ease pressures on installed capacity, labor indicators and ultimately in ation. Forecasts recently published in the September Monetary Policy Report were consistent with this scenario. 
On the external front, data gathered after the last monetary policy meeting con rmed the gradual recovery of growth in advanced economies and a slowdown in emerging markets. One positive element in the latter was the stabilization of some Chinese indicators, although concerns remained about the health of China’s nancial system. The risk of a sharper increase in the oil price had also gained importance in the last month, but incoming news seemed to have lessened these fears. International investors remained expectant of the upcoming meeting of the FOMC. Long-term interest rates on Treasury bonds of the United States and other advanced economies had been rising steadily but, unlike earlier months, without further negative effects on the emerging markets. One element that stood out was that the effects on the Chilean nancial markets had been fairly mild. 
As for domestic output, since the rst quarter GDP had been slowing down owing to lower investment growth, while private consumption gained strength. Projections in the last Report assumed that output would keep the pace of the rst half of the year, while the deceleration of nal demand would deepen in the next few quarters as private consumption dwindled. Until then the deceleration of consumption had been mild, re ecting the fact that there had been no signi cant adjustments in labor income or consumer credit availability. 
Economic activity indicators revealed an unusual discrepancy between output and nal sales during the past few months, which on this opportunity had translated into a sharp moderation of inventory accumulation. This development owed not to prospects of a sharp deceleration of nal sales, nor did it originate in a perception of excess inventories in the trade and manufacturing sectors as re ected in the surveys. It could simply be statistical noise, but one that called for further monitoring, because such discrepancy could later re ect in a reacceleration of production or increased imports. 
In this context, the option of keeping the monetary policy rate constant could be warranted by labor market conditions being still tight, output deceleration being mild so far, and nal demand still showing signi cant strength, plus the fact that some external risks had eased. As new information would become 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
available it would be possible to con rm if the recent slowdown of nal sales would deepen in the coming months as was implied in the last Report’s projections. In addition, this option was what the market consensus or majority was expecting, so it should not affect the evolution of the interest rate curve or other nancial prices. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
About the international scenario, all the Board members noted that moderate growth was consolidating in the U.S., while the process of withdrawing the unconventional monetary stimulus measures was expected to begin soon. They also mentioned the greater calm observed in Europe, where growth was still stagnant. They pointed out that although the slowdown in emerging economies was still ongoing, China’s slowdown seemed to have attened out and growth was stabilizing. One Board member added that such developments had translated into three overall patterns. First, U.S. long-term interest rates had remained high. Second, the increased stability abroad had reduced the emerging economies’ cost of external credit on the margin and their currencies had appreciated. The peso had been no exception. Third, the prices of commodities, copper included, had remained stable. 
One Board member suggested that the prospect that the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus would start soon in the U.S. had resulted in higher long-term interest rates there. The ip side to this was an improvement in the U.S. growth outlook. However, such interest rate increase had affected the rates elsewhere in the world. Special attention deserved the rising interest rates in the Eurozone, which certainly did not respond to higher growth prospects or expectations of a withdrawal of the monetary stimulus, but were rather a reaction to news coming from the United States. In this case, the increase in interest rates was not good news and some effects could be seen already, for example, the recent request for a new bailout for Greece and the steep rise of the sovereign risk in Portugal. 
One Board member, when commenting on the slowdown in emerging economies, stated the importance of monitoring developments in Brazil, Turkey, India, Indonesia and South Africa, because they had vulnerabilities that could intensify affecting the rest of the emerging world. One Board member expressed preoccupation about the clear signs of weakness and vulnerability in India. This, because although the Indian economy did not have a signi cant weight in terms of international trade and nancial ows, it was important in terms of GDP, population size and political in uence. Then this Board member turned to China, noting that con dence indicators in the country had been falling all year, crossing 
into pessimistic territory to its lowest record since the mid-1990s. While it was not easy to interpret Chinese gures, this could be anticipating further weakness in domestic consumption. One Board member drew attention to the fact that in emerging countries the scale was tilted towards taking foreign exchange and monetary policy measures aimed at curbing currency depreciations and in ation, in a clear counterpoint with the advanced economies. 
Turning to the Chilean economy, all ve Board members underscored the dichotomy between (continuing) output deceleration and the dynamism of consumption. 
Some Board members commented on the role played by inventory depletion in the evolution of domestic demand. One Board member raised the need for a better evaluation of this phenomenon, as it could be a predictor of lower consumption and investment in xed capital going forward, but it could also be anticipating a recovery of these inventories. 
Several Board members noted that some gures continued to anticipate a slowdown in consumption, although the velocity of this slowdown was hard to predict. In particular, they remarked the downward adjustment of consumer expectations, the slowdown in the wage mass and the moderate pace of the consumer credit trend. They also highlighted the decline in business expectations and investment growth. One Board member added the moderation in imports, especially of intermediate goods, which had been showing negative y-o-y growth numbers for four months already. 
One Board member said that as long as consumption and investment continued growing persistently at today’s pace, it was difficult to envision output decelerating any further. But, at the same time, to the extent that consumption had not deviated from its fundamentals, it was possible for output to continue to grow by a little over 4% and for the exchange rate to stay where it was, which, coupled with a reduction in wage pressures, would keep in ation bounded for some time longer. 
One Board member commented that strong consumption coupled with output growing at a slower pace but still not signi cantly misaligned with potential, bought time for the Central Bank to continue to monitor the situation before deciding to change the MPR. In his opinion, some deceleration of private consumption should be observed in the months to come, and a more intense slowdown in output could not be ruled out. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
One Board member pointed out that relative prices could be expected to react to the lower external impulse. In that sense, he was surprised that although the peso had been slowly appreciating, it had done so not only against the dollar but in multilateral terms as well, which in his opinion was at odds with the stimulus coming from the global economy. The combination of the above with low in ation, needed to be watched carefully, to evaluate whether it followed a trend. If it did, concluded this Board member, courses of action should be examined. 
About in ation, all the Board members noted that it was still low, while core in ation was expected to return very gradually to 3%. Moreover, they noted that expectations continued to hover around 3% in the policy horizon. One Board member pointed out that wages were beginning to slow, but in any case it was necessary to wait for the next data to be able to isolate the incidence of the change in the date the readjustment of the minimum wage would come into effect, before rendering a more conclusive verdict. 
Turning to the monetary policy decision, all ve Board members opined that the best decision was to keep the MPR at 5%. One Board member said that although the two options proposed by the Research Division were valid, he was inclined to keeping the rate unchanged, for two reasons. First, because gures had shown that the domestic economy had managed to maintain some momentum, with limited slowdown in output, and he believed that keeping the MPR constant again this time allowed room for movement and assessment going forward. Second, because the market expected no change, and he saw no reason at the moment to surprise the market. 
In the opinion of one Board member, several elements had to be weighed. First, it should be evaluated whether the signs of slowdown were enough to warrant a reduction in the MPR. In his view, the signs were visible, but he thought prudent to wait for them to consolidate. A second point, closely related to the rst, had to do with the level of the MPR. Although it was within a range of values that could be considered normal for our country, the differential with the rest of the world, and particularly the developed countries, was huge, with all its implications on the monetary policy conduct. This suggested that there was room for a reduction, which would be still there in the coming months. A third element had to do with the magnitude of the adjustment to be done. Whenever a very small change is proposed, one wonders if it wouldn’t be wiser to favor stability. In his opinion, at this point there was no such concern. A fourth point referred to the effects of a reduction that in these circumstances could induce a change in the composition of demand that would facilitate the necessary adjustments in the domestic economy. Putting off the decision inde nitely 
could favor the return to a scenario of a more appreciated peso, low in ation and consumption growth moderating very slowly. An additional consideration, speci c to this meeting, was that the market expected no change. Although he thought this should not be taken as a constraint, in the current circumstances the market would not easily absorb a policy surprise measure. 
One Board member considered that the options proposed by the Research Division were the most reasonable. Keeping the MPR was consistent with the dynamism of nal demand and, accordingly, with the still big de cit of the current account. Lowering the MPR was consistent with a complex external scenario, with persistently low in ation, which apparently would remain below the Central Bank’s target for a while, with particularly low core in ation, with medium-term in ation expectations at 3%, slowing output and leading indicators anticipating a deceleration of demand. Overall, he concluded, it was important to hold on to the policy of not reacting to one-time gures and continuing to project tendencies. This, because recent data could have led to a decision either way, which would have been a mistake. Furthermore, it was possible to foresee that in the immediate future volatile data would be coming in, which should not make one lose perspective for the medium and long term. 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board members Marshall, Claro and Vial, to maintain the annual monetary policy rate at 5.0%. 
