MINUTES OF THE 
MONETARY POLICY MEETING 
The monetary policy session N°190 was held on 13 September 2012. 
Present: Rodrigo Vergara, Governor; Manuel Marfán, Vice-Governor; Enrique Marshall, Board member; Sebastián Claro, Board member; Joaquín Vial, Board member. 
Present the Finance Undersecretary, Julio Dittborn. 
Also present: Alejandro Zurbuchen, General Manager; Miguel Ángel Nacrur, General Counsel and Attestor; Luis Óscar Herrera, Research Division Director; Beltrán de Ramón, Financial Operations Division Director; Kevin Cowan, Financial Policy Division Director; Ricardo Vicuña, Statistics Division Director; Claudio Soto, Macroeconomic Analysis Manager; Sergio Lehmann, International Analysis Manager; Claudio Raddatz, Economic Research Manager; Luis Opazo, Financial Stability Manager; Luis Álvarez, Consultant Manager of Communications; Enrique Orellana, Monetary Policy Strategy and Communication Manager; Rodrigo Cerda, Advisor to the Minister of Finance; Tatiana Vargas, Senior Economist; Víctor Riquelme, Economic Analyst; Marlys Pabst, Secretary General. 
1. Background 
1.1 Brie ng 
Both the background information and the presentation prepared by the Research Division, based on publicly available information, can be accessed on the Bank’s website1/. 
1.2 Background analysis and comments 
About the international environment, the recent developments in the Eurozone were discussed, particularly the announcements of the European Central Bank 
1/ http://www.bcentral.cl/politicas/reuniones-politica-monetaria/index.htm 
(ECB) regarding the purchase of sovereign bonds in the secondary market, the decision of the German Constitutional Tribunal on the legality of the ESM and elections in the Netherlands. There was consensus in that although these developments pointed in the right direction, because they demonstrated the ECB’s willingness to act to pursue a solution to the problems affecting the region, and established a roadmap for future action, there was still a long way to go. Also discussed was the recent upward trajectory of the copper price and the possible reasons behind it. 
As for the local economy, the evolution of domestic demand was commented, in particular whether recent developments indicated a slowdown in expenditure or rather the potential incubation of conditions for a reacceleration in the margin. Also commented was the evolution of fuel prices, especially the possible short-run effects of the changes to the SIPCO and the volatility of these prices. 
2. Options 
On this occasion, with the information gathered since the last meeting, the Research Division proposed as the relevant option to keep the monetary policy interest rate (MPR) at 5.0%. 
The September Monetary Policy Report depicted an external scenario characterized by slow growth of developed countries, a temporary slowdown of emerging economies, stable terms of trade, low interest rates on the main currencies and continuing nancial stress in the world markets. The recent announcements of the ECB had been welcome by investors, with a widespread improvement of nancial conditions in the Eurozone and around the world. It could be expected that these measures would bring some respite to advance in the structural reforms that were required to enhance scal and nancial stability in the Eurozone. While acknowledging progress, materialization entailed big political dif culties, so the risks in the zone remained present and a resurgence of nancial tensions in the coming months could not be ruled out. This coupled with the decision of the Federal Reserve to amplify its asset purchase plan and extend the period in which it would hold the interest rate at its minimum. Meanwhile, recent output indicators in China and other Asian economies reaf rmed the perception that a slowdown could be brewing in the region, although this contrasted with the recent increase in the copper price. 
Domestically, the Monetary Policy Report estimated that installed capacity and the labor market were tight, which called for Chile’s economic growth 
2 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
approaching its potential in order to avoid the incubation of medium-term in ationary pressures. So far, core in ation had evolved within the tolerance range, but there was the latent risk that the scenario of intensi ed utilization of available resources could foster the transmission of possible cost-push or demand-pull pressures to nal prices. Growth forecasts in the Monetary Policy Report anticipated a slowdown of the Chilean economy in the coming quarters, related to the lower global growth. However, the same as in previous meetings, the evidence suggested that such slowdown was still mild. This was one aspect that monetary policy had to continue to watch. Also, the greater accumulated growth in domestic expenses had re ected in a higher current account de cit which, should it widen further and persistently, could become a factor of economic and nancial vulnerability if it occurs accompanied by sharp drops in terms of trade or a retraction of the supply of international credit. This was another aspect that called for close monitoring. 
Regarding monetary policy, the alternative of raising the MPR was overruled this time considering the expected evolution of the external scenario and its potential impact on the Chilean economy and in ation. Headline and core in ation measures were still in the lower part of the target range, while wages and non-tradable services’ in ation were stable and expectations continued to hover around the target. The option to lower the MPR was ruled out on this occasion, taking into account output gap and labor market tightness, which posed a risk to the medium-term in ation outlook. It was probable that the external slowdown would contribute to clear this risk in the coming months, but its effect so far had been mild. As for the option of holding the policy rate unchanged, it was justi ed in that the current level of the MPR was within the range of neutral values, which provided time and exibility to wait for new information about the evolution of the global scenario and its impact on the Chilean economy. 
3. Monetary policy decision 
All the Board members agreed that information received after the publication of September’s Monetary Policy Report were in line with the Report’s baseline scenario. 
All the Board members noted that the main development had been the announcements made in the Eurozone, plus the recent decisions of the Federal Reserve. Anyway, all the Board members noted that the overall outlines of the baseline scenario were still valid, with a slow recovery of the developed economies, a slowdown in the emerging world and with terms of trade and 
external nancial conditions that continued to be favorable for the domestic economy. 
Commenting on the Eurozone measures, all the Board members coincided in the importance of the agreements and the positive effect they had had on the nancial markets. All the Board members underscored the sharp drop in the risk premiums of troubled European countries, which had allowed governments and large companies, including large Spanish banks, to access credits with high, yet affordable, interest rates. They added that this fact continued to favor the Chilean public and private agents’ access to external credit. One Board member noted that it was likely that the interest rates of the main developed markets would remain low for many years, also affecting commodity prices, so the recent hikes could be longer-lasting. 
Several Board members noted that the measures adopted reduced the probability of more catastrophic scenarios somewhat. One Board member added that this fact, together with the strengths of the Chilean economy, the low cost of external credit and the high terms of trade provided support, in essence, to the current dynamic outlook for domestic demand. 
One Board member highlighted the positive nature of the various announcements in the Eurozone, but at the same time he noted some apprehensions. The rst one was that, in his opinion, the rst visible horizon of the banking union system (i.e. the middle of next year), could be too late. The second concern was that, while the ECB’s decision to participate exclusively in the secondary market of sovereign bonds was correc —because when it operated in the primary market it was in practice granting a loan to the states—there were counterproductive elements involved. However, since the main turbulences observed this year had been linked to periods of high sovereign debt renewal and therefore associated to primary market developments, it was possible that despite the announcements there would be a signi cant resurgence of these turbulences. In his opinion, this element was stronger if considering the magnitude of the debt instruments maturing in the next few months. He added that probably whatever occurred at the time of these maturities would be a test to assess the credibility of the measures being applied. Therefore, he concluded, although the measures pointed in the right direction and taking them was risk-reducing, risks were still very high. 
Domestically, one Board member noted that the latest output and demand gures con rmed the diagnosis that the economy was gradually decelerating and approaching its trend growth rates. However, he added, there was an unsettling concern about the sustainability of the observed trajectory of output and demand. 
3 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
Such concern was backed by objective data, such as the relatively tight conditions in the labor market and the evolution of the current account. He went on to say that in ation was still on a downward trend. Although the latest monthly gure had been again surprisingly low, it had to be taken cautiously, because lately the in ation’s short-term trajectory had experienced sharp accelerations and decelerations due to factors beyond control. Overall, he concluded, what mattered was that the medium-term outlook continued to present signi cant in ationary risks, associated with the current capacity constraints and growth prospects contemplated in the baseline scenario. Furthermore, it was important to note that the in ation components most related to the state of the economy were posting considerably higher-than-average variation rates. 
One Board member pointed out that GDP and demand were growing at trend rates, but their earlier increase and the drop in the terms of trade translated into a widening of the current account de cit. He added that, in his view, the current level of this de cit was not cause for concern, but its potential widening and persistence could be, as it produced vulnerabilities that could jeopardize the Central Bank’s objectives going forward. He also noted that this had been accompanied by a real appreciation of the peso that, because of external developments, had intensi ed in recent weeks. 
One Board member called the attention to the evolution of demand and its effects. In his view, the tight labor market and the intensi ed utilization of installed capacity could be signaling a demand disturbance. If so, the risk affected not only the possible in ationary pressures, but also could translate in pressures on the balance of payments and the exchange rate. Thus, it was possible that the evolution of the current account and the recent peso appreciation were responding to the behavior of demand. This, beyond the fact that the reconstruction works post 27F could be explaining part of the increase in the current account de cit. Anyway, he concluded, closer monitoring was needed on demand, because the pressures on the exchange rate could be originating not only in the external developments, but in domestic factors as well. 
One Board member said that, in his opinion, the risk balance seemed to be changing. In particular, because the Eurozone’s measures combined with recent increases in the copper price, con guring a scenario where the external sector contributed signi cantly to moderate domestic demand in Chile. Plus the local economy showed in ation with surprises to the downside, together with con dence, sales and investment indicators that pointed to a somewhat stronger expansion of domestic demand. Although the above did not con gure a signi cant departure from the last Monetary Policy Report’s baseline scenario, it did represent a higher probability of the scenario of further domestic demand 
growth, so in the coming months it was necessary to follow the evolution of these variables very closely. 
About the monetary policy decision, all the Board members agreed that the available indicators pointed at the convenience of holding the MPR constant. One Board member noted that the current con guration of the macroeconomic scenario posed a major challenge to monetary policy making. The evaluation of the Chilean economy’s performance, in its various dimensions, showed no imbalances. In his view, so far, the evolution of the external accounts, the real exchange rate and domestic credit did not seem to deviate from the national economy’s fundamentals and prevailing external conditions. However, he went on, he thought that the biggest challenge was that, barring some complex event in the Eurozone or a much sharper slowdown of China, it was probable that this con guration of a favorable external impulse would continue and even deepen further. In his opinion, the U.S. interest rates remaining for several years at their minimum levels was an unprecedented fact that represented part of the mentioned risks. Overall, he concluded, for now, with in ation low and signi cant dynamism of output and demand —although not very far from their trend rates— the need of holding the MPR in the range of neutrality where it was became obvious. 
One Board member noted that the arguments for maintaining the MPR were quite similar to those that had been brought in previous meetings. The MPR stood at a level that could be considered neutral, which granted monetary policy a relatively comfortable position. And the risks coming from abroad were being offset, at least in relative terms, by those of the domestic scenario, reinforcing the convenience of making no changes. He ended by pointing out that the identi cation of a single reasonable option over several meetings already attested to the complexity of the scenario for the conduct of monetary policy. 
One Board member noted that the present circumstances were rendering monetary policy decisions more complex. On one hand, inflation, both headline and core, beyond its short-term volatility, was still low and the risks that remained in the external scenario were good reasons to favor further relaxation. On the other hand, the strength of domestic output and demand, plus the tight labor market, pulled in the other direction. This latter fact was complex, however, because at least in the short run it could prompt an even sharper appreciation of the peso. He added that, in his opinion, in this scenario the coordination of macroeconomic policies —both monetary and scal and macroprudential— was particularly important, in order to achieve the de ned objectives without generating imbalances that could translate into vulnerabilities and further adjustments in the future. 
4 
CENTRAL BANK OF CHILE 
Monetary Policy Meeting 
4. Agreed policy action 
The Board decided, with the votes of Governor Vergara, Vice-Governor Marfán and Board members Marshall, Claro and Vial, to keep the monetary policy interest rate at 5.0% (annual). 
